Designing for Axiological Innovation Within Family-CenteredLearning EnvironmentsEnrique Suárez (organizer), University of Washington Seattle, suareze@uw.eduMegan Bang, University of Washington Seattle, mbang3@uw.edu,Meixi*, University of Washington Seattle, meixi@uw.edu,Philip Bell, University of Washington Seattle, pbell@uw.eduCarrie Tzou, University of Washington Bothell, tzouct@uw.eduRicarose Roque, University of Colorado Boulder, ricarose@colorado.eduNichole Pinkard, Northwestern University, nichole.pinkard@northwestern.eduBrigid Barron, Stanford University, barronbj@stanford.eduCaitlin K. Martin, Stanford University, ckmartin@stanford.eduMegan R. Luce, Stanford University, mluce@stanford.eduTanner Vea, Stanford University, tvea@stanford.eduShelley Goldman, Stanford University, sgoldman@stanford.eduLuke D. Conlin, Salem State University, lconlin@salemstate.eduRaymond McDermott (discussant), Stanford University, rpmcd@stanford.eduAbstract: Learning environments based on axiological innovations (Bang, et al., 2016)recognize the resources learners of all ages bring and value learning based in commitments toexpand relationships of collaboration. We take up lines of design-based research focused on theexpansive engagement of families, where our goal was to create STEM-based intergenerationallearning environments that center family collaboration to transform the process of partneringand increase collective capacity to make sense of the natural world, engage in practices, andreimagine participants’ relationships to technologies (Bang, et al., 2012). The four studies thatcomprise the symposium shed light on the kinds of axiological innovations that guided thedesign of learning environments that created equitable and transformative STEM-basedlearning opportunities for families from nondominant communities. Through the symposiumwe will explore the implications of family-centered axiological innovation for learning theoryand design knowledge related to the articulation of extended, cross-setting learning pathways.Rationale and contribution: Reframing family learningRecognizing that learning occurs across space and time, learning scientists have thought deeply about how todesign learning environments were both children and their adult family members can learn (Barron & Bell, 2015).This approach is often rooted in a commitment to seeing learning as dynamic cultural processes, recognizing thatpeople make sense of and shape their world in ways that are connected to the practices, values, and worldviewsof their communities (Bang, et al., 2012; Bang, et al., 2016; Bell et al., 2012; Gutiérrez and Rogoff, 2003). Thisperspective is important not only because it opens new avenues of learning and participating for learners of allages, but also because it can create opportunities for all learners to make sense of the world through leveragingmeaningful cultural practices, identities, and places as they interact with those whom they have a deep connectionwith (Nasir, et al., 2014; Rosebery et al., 2005). However, we argue that educational contexts have not adequatelyexplored how to leverage the shared history and intergenerational learning processes of families in support of theirown STEM education. In this symposium, then, we pursue the question: how can we design STEM-based learningenvironments founded on a set of values and ethics that create equitable and transformative learning opportunitiesfor families?Intergenerational designs have been particularly popular with STEM-based learning environments,particularly MakerSpaces that have sprouted all over the US and bring children and adults together to designartifacts, solve problems, and learn about the natural world through engaging in science and engineering practices(Roque, 2016). However, the STEM-based intergenerational learning environments we design need tosystematically work to push against boundaries of normative practices and tap into the repertoires of practice ofnondominant learners and non-traditional configurations of learners (Bang, et al., 2012). Otherwise, the programswe design will reify the same systems of oppression that have shut the door of STEM learning for students fromnondominant communities and their families, and interrupted productive identity-work that would allow learnersto see themselves as being able to make sense of the natural world (Bell, et al., 2009; Calabrese Barton &1187Brickhouse, 2006; Calabrese Barton, et al., 2013; Tzou, et al., 2017). A very common example of how STEMbased learning environments recreate these oppressive dynamics is the out-of-school learning program thatpositions families as consumers or users of technology, rather than creating opportunities for families to reimaginetheir relationships to technology and how it can be used as part of the cultural practices of their communities(Tzou, et al., 2017; Vossoughi, Hooper & Escudé, 2016). Consumer-framed programs, often inadvertently, arefounded on a set of values and ethics that embody deficit perspectives of families, their experience, their expertise,and their relation to technology. If left unchecked, learning scientists can continue to design learning environmentsin which these oppressive dynamics are reified and reproduced, narrowing and limiting the kinds of meaningfullearning that families can experience, rather than building upon the heterogeneous sense-making practices andknowledge that families bring to learning environments.To overturn these kinds of oppressive and colonial dynamics within STEM-based programs, it isparamount that our designs for learning environments are based on axiological innovations (Bang, et al., 2016)that transform relational positionings and value the resources learners of all ages bring to the learningenvironment. We draw from the construct proposed by Bang and her collaborators, who define axiologicalinnovations as “the theories, practices, and structures of values, ethics, and aesthetics (...) that shape current andpossible meaning, meaning-making, positioning, and relations in cultural ecologies” (Bang, et al., 2016, p. 2829). We argue it is key for learning scientists that engage in design-based research to attend to how the axiologicalcommitments that undergird their designs create opportunities for all learners to experience transformative agencyand disrupt historical inequities. Here, we call for creating STEM-based intergenerational learning environmentsthat desettle normative expectations about what it means to make sense of the natural world, engage in practices,and reimagine participants’ relationships to technologies (Bang, et al., 2012). We propose that family-centered,STEM-based learning environments provide a powerful context for exploring this perspective. Family-centeredlearning environments disrupt age segregation and the colonialist consequences of creating separate learningspaces for adults and children, which can be particularly disruptive for participants from nondominantcommunities. Nevertheless, much remains to be studied in terms of examining the axiological and ideologicalfoundations of equity-oriented design and research in such environments, and we need to start by transparentlycommunicating what those underpinnings are and how they inform our designs (Bang & Vossoughi, 2016). Thisis our plan for this symposium.The four studies that comprise the symposium, all of which took place in the US, shed light on the kindsof axiological innovations that guided the design of learning environments to create equitable and transformativeSTEM-based learning opportunities for families from nondominant communities. The first study describes howyouth and their families reframed their relations to technology, leveraging programming and robotics as tools forstorytelling, memory-making, and STEAM learning, resisting being dominated by those technologies. The secondstudy focuses on how engaging in computing practices supported children and their parents reframe how they sawthemselves in relation to programming, and even each other. The third study highlights the importance of parentlearning networks in the development of interest and experience with creative digital projects, and the importanceof differentiating roles that parents can play as learning partners. The fourth study describes how familiesinteracted and problematized natural phenomena together, in a learning environment designed to supportintergenerational learning and recognize families’ funds of knowledge as productive resources. Taken together,these studies make the contribution that family-centered learning environments that support axiologicalinnovations can ground STEM learning in families’ cultural knowledge and practices, promote role re-mediationthrough shifted social positioning, and support extended cultural learning pathways for youth and adults alike.Through the symposium we will explore the implications of family-centered axiological innovations for learningtheory and design knowledge related to the articulation of extended, cross-setting learning pathways.Paper 1: Technologies of remembering and learning with Indigenous Families:Storymaking, robotics, and computer scienceMegan Bang, Meixi*, Philip Bell, University of Washington SeattleCarrie Tzou, University of Washington BothellFraming and study designThe roles of science, engineering and technology in learning and learning environments are increasingly a focusand hope for more equitable and transformative learning, particularly for students from nondominantcommunities. However, these fields have not historically been attuned to culturally heterogeneous ways ofknowing. Scholars are exploring how the cultivation of consequential learning environments (Gutiérrez & Jurow,2016) are intimately intertwined with historicity, knowledge systems, and the agentic positioning of learners to1188be the designers of new technologies (e.g. Prins, 2002). This paper presents findings from a Participatory DesignResearch (PDR) (Bang & Vossoughi, 2016) project that brought together learning scientists into collaborationwith public librarians, informal science education staff, and staff from Native American-serving communityorganizations who were jointly focused on designing family-centered and culturally expansive STEAM (sciencetechnology-engineering-art-math) learning experiences working with nondominant communities. We designedTechTales, a five session, 3-hour weekly workshop series that centered nondominant families’ stories andstorymaking (Archibald, 2008) processes as a means of re-positioning families’ relationships to technology andmore specifically robotics. Families made a diorama of an important family story using Scratch (programminglanguage) and a Hummingbird (microcontroller) to animate the artifact using outputs such as LED lights, sounds,and motors, and inputs, such as sensors of various kinds.Data sources and analysisIn this paper, we examine the forms of learning and engagement of two Indigenous families across the fiveTechTales workshops. Data were collected utilizing multiple video streams and audio to capture the discursive aswell as the embodied forms of activity that unfolded over the course of the workshop (Goodwin, 2000; 2007).The videos were content logged and key moments of project development were identified for interaction analysis(Jordan & Henderson, 1995). Key moments in this analysis were conceptualized as interactions in which thefamilies’ storyline and design development were dynamically intertwined. Further, we analyzed moments ofrefinement driven by interactions between design intentions and materiality. Finally, we explored the ways inwhich family identities were reinforced and expanded throughout the workshops.FindingsWe find that using story and storymaking as the focus of diorama building created learning environments wherecomputer programming and robotics became dynamic tools towards family-making, collaboration, and learningsimultaneously. Families’ attention to aesthetics during the design reflected both family identity and memory andopened important disciplinary epistemic opportunities in order to produce affective responses to their stories. Forexample, one family wanted to capture a family memory of an annual trip traveling to their homeland and theirdaughter’s first lightning storm. The family engaged in deeply agentic building to capture the aesthetic effects ofboth the lightning in a cloud and their hair standing on end when the lighting struck. In a post-interview with thisfamily, the father indicated the important role this experience played in solidifying that memory for the familyand especially for the daughter.Father: I don't remember much when I was 7 years old. By doing this whole TechTales story,we all have a shared memory... I'm curious to see if, you know when she (daughter) turns 12,when she turns 20, will she remember that whole lightning storm? Which if we hadn't talkedabout it, hadn't done the TechTales, it would be just totally lost.In this way, we are interested in both the work that stories do as both tools for memory making and asdrivers of innovation with the technology to capture aesthetic and affective dimensions of place. Family-making,collaboration, and storytelling in this case seemed to open up deeper re-mediations against domination bytechnology, as well as opportunities for re-mediating agency as families appropriated these tools towards theirown ends.Implications and contributionsIn a digital age, assimilative technology is often blamed for mediating away from and severing familialconnections. Through shared memory-making within families, we explore the possibilities with digitaltechnologies to build intergenerational connections rather than divides. The interweaving of storytelling, computerprogramming, and epistemic practices brought families stories to life, and worked towards re-making relationsboth within family units and to technology. In this way, learning environments based in a commitment to familycentered and culturally expansive design projects is an axiological innovation that provided multiple entry pointsfor family member participation and spaces for ongoing cultural contribution, collaboration, and STEAMlearning.Paper 2: Making projects, making identities: Families constructing their owncomputing identities1189Ricarose Roque, University of Colorado BoulderFraming and study designWe will describe a study of families developing their identities as computational creators in a family learningprogram designed to support families to create and learn together with creative technologies. Through a series ofworkshops, Family Creative Learning (FCL) engages families, particularly from underrepresented groups incomputing, and aims to support children and parents in developing roles and practices to support one another ina changing and increasingly important context in our digital society (Roque, 2016).The design of FCL was inspired by constructionist approaches, which engage people in learningexperiences where they can create personally and socially meaningful projects (Papert, 1980). Building onconstructivist theory, as people build projects, they build ideas (Kafai & Resnick, 1996). To be personallymeaningful, the design of FCL invites families to build on their diverse “repertoires of practices” and “funds ofknowledge” (Gutiérrez & Rogoff, 2003; Moll, Amanti, Nef & Gonzalez, 1992). To be socially meaningful, thedesign of FCL has also leveraged learning theories that emphasize the social aspects of learning (Brown, Duguid,& Collins, 1989; Lave & Wenger, 1991). Families are encouraged to work together as well as interact with otherfamilies participating in FCL.We argue that as people engage in building personally and socially meaningful projects, they haveopportunities to build identities as creators with computing. We use sociocultural and practice-based views oflearning and identity development to examine children’s and their parents’ developing a sense of self in computingin relation to their participation in FCL (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Nasir & Hand, 2008).Data sources and analysisWe took an ethnographic approach to understand individual perspectives as well as to examine the social andcultural practices that emerge within the learning environment. The design and development of Family CreativeLearning was inspired by design-based and participatory approaches, which emphasize being embedded in thelocal context, engaging people as collaborators rather than research subjects, and experimenting with multipleiterations (Stringer, 2013; Barab, et al., 2004).We recorded observations and collected photos, videos, and project artifacts during the workshops. Afterthe workshops, we conducted reflections with the facilitation team and 30-90 minute interviews with individualfamily members. We focused data collection on eight program implementations of FCL from 2012-2015, whichengaged more than 60 families primarily from underrepresented groups in computing.FindingsWe describe the ways that children and parents’ participation in this program influenced their identitydevelopment in the context of computing. For example, parents and children had opportunities to see themselvesand each other in new ways. Initially, parents shared how uncertain they felt about their abilities with technology.Often their children echoed these perceptions of their parents. Through first-hand experience with the creativetechnologies, parents saw how they could “create something out of nothing” with computing. Similarly, as theyworked with their children on family projects, parents shared the ways their children saw them. As one child saidwhen asked about what surprised him about his mom, he said: “When she invented things.” Additionally, wediscuss the design of learning environment and its different aspects (tools, activities, facilitation, and space) ininfluencing their development as computational creators.Implications and contributionsOften learning environments focus on developing skills and content knowledge and how these outcomes transferin other settings. However, the shifting perspectives and identity development within these activities can haveprofound implications in how youth and their families decide to persist or pursue future opportunities (Beach,1999; Nasir & Hand, 2008). Perspectives from parents and other adult caretakers can influence how they provideresources and broker new opportunities. We have an opportunity to design these learning environments and toengage children and their families to support children’s identity work in the context of computing.Paper 3: Parents collaborating to learn: Insights from family co-designworkshops about reframing expert rolesNichole Pinkard, Northwestern UniversityBrigid Barron, Caitlin K. Martin, Stanford University1190Framing and study designNetworked technologies and digital tools provide young people and their families with new forms of creativeagency to pursue questions and activities of interest to them. They also provide rich opportunities for novel andvaried forms of intergenerational learning with family members dynamically taking on roles as teachers, learners,collaborators and brokers (Barron, Martin, Takeuchi, & Fithian, 2009). The notion of families as a unique type ofcreative ensemble (John-Steiner, 2000) invites researchers and designers to expand our units of analyses toconceptualize parents, grandparents, and children as potential members of extended digital learning teams (Katz,2014). In this framing, parents and children have unique and complementary funds of knowledge and repertoiresof practice and are able to share them depending on what learning opportunities they have been provided at school,at work, and informally with friends or community-based organizations. How parents and children take up rolesas more expert guides is also influenced by their cultural repertoires of practice around teaching and learning(Gutiérrez & Rogoff, 2003) as well as opportunities and needs that may present themselves because of rapidlychanging technologies. In this paper, we share findings from a design experiment that created a novel learningexperience for parents to connect with other parents about how they share and co-develop expertise with theirchildren. The design of the workshop built on ethnographic studies of families in both Silicon Valley (Barron, etal., 2009) and in Chicago (Pinkard & Austin, 2014) that showed the varied ways that families learn to design andcreate together and how new roles as guides and learners emerged with changing expertise levels. A specific goalof the multi-sited ethnographic research was to support and make visible informal learning experiences that mightcontribute to future pathways as designers, digital artists and activists, and social advocates for one’s owncommunity.Data sources and analysisWorkshops were designed to support a community of parents and other caring adults (grandparents, aunts, adultcousins) to develop agency and confidence in the roles they play in their children’s technological learning,especially for those without perceived expertise. Workshops were developed for the families of middle schoolgirls in an out-of-school computational making program. The majority of girls in the program were from nondominant communities (59% African American; 18% Latina) underrepresented in STEM learning pathways.Sessions included an introduction to parent support roles, brokering STEM learning opportunities in Chicago,collaborating through co-design of an LED-embedded greeting card, and non-technical consulting throughvisibility of and discussion around their children’s STEM projects. Each session included presentation, activities,and reflection/discussion with the community. Data collection (N = 113) includes surveys of roles played andreflections on workshop participation, attendance records, online participation traces in community groups, andobservations from in-person sessions captured in field notes, photographs, and created artifacts.FindingsResults fall into three clusters: (1) Existing intentionality alongside perceived need for more support: Parents weredeeply engaged in their children’s learning and hungry for opportunities to support STEM education. They wereespecially eager for ways to find quality STEM opportunities that could extend their child’s learning beyond thefocal program. (2) Workshops sparked collective creativity and broadened networks: Adults brought individualinterests and knowledge to the workshops and engaged deeply in collaborative design work, learning from, sharingwith, and helping each other during the sessions. Enhancing adult community connections can widen opportunitiesfor youth through expanded parent brokering as individuals combined knowledge and ideas. (3) Opportunities forreframing expert roles and for bi-directional technology content learning and teaching: While half of parentsreported regularly encouraging their daughter and playing the role of a learning broker and a quarter reportedlearning from or teaching their child regularly, only 11% reported collaborating on projects involving technology.Implications and contributionsGenerating expansive designs for intergenerational learning is a critical need in the learning sciences. In this paper,we highlight the importance of parent learning networks in the development of interest and experience withcreative digital projects and the importance of differentiating roles that parents can play as learning partners. Ourultimate goal is to advance possible pathways for all young people and their families as everyday and professionaldesigners of digital tools, and to generate new methods to document their evolution. To the extent that we have amore homogenous group of professionals imagining and building future tools we fail to capitalize on a diversityof perspectives, ultimately limiting potential solutions. It is generally agreed that this is a multidimensional1191problem that includes early gaps in experience, gender and racial stereotyping of technical work, and workplacesthat create climates that suppress rather than invite contributions from all. Parent co-learning networks may beone resource that can foster resilience and boost collective creativity.Paper 4: Eliciting family sense-making resources in scientific inquiry duringmultilingual family science nightsMegan R. Luce, Tanner Vea, Shelley Goldman, Stanford UniversityLuke D. Conlin, Salem State UniversityFraming and study design“Yo decía que la ciencia era algo extraordinario, que no se podía entender. Pero es algo que...se puede ver, se puede hacer. Para mí era algo... ahh... que no entendía. Pero la semana pasadaque vine dije, “¡Wow!” Entonces la ciencia es algo que se puede hacer fácil y sencillo y sinestudio.” – Florencia“I used to say that science was something extraordinary, that could not be understood. But it issomething that… you can see, you can do. For me it used to be something…ahh…that I did notunderstand. But when I came last week I said, “Wow!” Then science is something you can doeasily and simply and without studying.”The above statement was made by a Spanish-speaking mother, Florencia, on the second night of ourmultilingual family science workshop, where children and adults collaboratively explored everyday materials andwere invited to make sense of phenomena together. We had hypothesized that such experiences could shiftfamilies’ perceptions of what counts as science, who can participate successfully, and the role families play inchildren’s science learning. Florencia’s reported shift in thought was not uncommon in our workshops. Such shiftsserved as an existence proof that our approach could be successful. We conducted a more in-depth analysis tounderstand what led to such shifts in perspective, and their effects on family sensemaking dynamics. How did wehelp Florencia see that she is capable of understanding science without having to “study” science? How did thisshift in perspective influence her approach to learning science with her daughter? Did other families have similarexperiences?We see this effort as exploring the intersection of two axiological innovations (Bang, et al., 2016): 1)Intergenerational learning: We asked families to make sense of phenomena together instead of asking parents to“help” their children with the science activities; 2) Resources as strengths: The primary modes of inquiry andexploration came from families’ own questions, their rich knowledge of the physical world, and their thoughtfulengagement with scientific phenomena.In designing and conducting the workshops we took a resources view of learning (Hammer, et al., 2005;Warren, et al., 2001) in which families use their linguistic and cognitive resources to construct their ownunderstandings, in contrast with the dominant “deficit” view in which learners have robust scientificmisconceptions that must be confronted and replaced. We used everyday materials (e.g., ice and water, flashlights, Slinky toys) and tied inquiry discussions to local contexts (e.g. a strange looking tree at their school),supporting families to draw upon their funds of knowledge (González, et al., 2005). For this ICLS session, wepresent the results of an in-depth analysis of moments of activity in which the design of our workshop supportedintergenerational learning.Data sources and analysisWe engaged families in an inquiry-based evening science program at four ethnically and linguistically diverse K8 schools. Each school had four weekly two-hour sessions. Between eight and fifteen families attended each night.Sessions were conducted bilingually, with translation in real-time. In this paper, we present findings from aninteraction analysis (Derry, et al., 2010; Jordan & Henderson, 1995) of video records of families’ activities duringthe workshop, focusing on how our design choices supported collaborative intergenerational learning. In the firstpart of the analysis, we identified moments when intergenerational learning occurred, i.e., moments where parentsand children were making sense of phenomena together. Then we analyzed what led up to these moments, andwhat sustained them, to identify factors that supported intergenerational learning.Findings1192We will present analysis of three moments of activity from three different families. For example, on the thirdevening of the workshop Florencia and her daughter discovered that a blue LED light connected to a battery wouldsuddenly go out when a red LED was added. They disagreed about whether the blue light was completelyextinguished and, rather than Florencia asserting her explanation to her daughter, they investigated together bygoing into a dark closet to examine the light levels more closely and puzzled about what could be happening tothe electricity flow when the red light was added.In-depth analysis of such moments reveals several factors that supported intergenerational learning: 1)utilizing familiar, inexpensive materials encouraged families to playfully discover and co-investigate novelphenomena, 2) a resources-based perspective encouraged parents and children to draw upon their own ideas andlived experiences, 3) bilingual translation afforded English-primary and Spanish-primary families to be able toengage together, and 4) in-the-moment marking of their reasoning as “scientific” helped parents and children toassociate their funds of knowledge with doing science.Implications and contributionsThe analyses provide accounts of how a design focus on families’ cognitive, linguistic, cultural resources cansupport intergenerational science learning and challenge dominant conceptions of what counts as science and whocan participate. These findings provide additional support for the promise of design that encourages families’playful scientific sensemaking in informal environments (Luce, et al., 2017). One question for future research ishow to design supports for families to learn together in relatively unstructured environments or during family timeat home. We have incorporated these design innovations in developing a bilingual app to support familiesexploring science together, on their own time and in their own terms.ReferencesArchibald, J. A. (2008). Indigenous storywork: Educating the heart, mind, body, and spirit. UBC Press.Bang, M., & Vossoughi, S. (2016). Participatory Design Research and Educational Justice: Studying Learningand Relations Within Social Change Making. Cognition and Instruction, 34(3), 173–193.Bang, M., Faber, L., Gurneau, J., Marin, A., & Soto, C. (2016). Community-based design research: Learningacross generations and strategic transformations of institutional relations toward axiological innovations.Mind, Culture, and Activity, 23(1), 28-41.Bang, M., Warren, B., Rosebery, A. S., & Medin, D. (2012). Desettling expectations in science education. HumanDevelopment, 55, 302-318.Barab, S. A., Thomas, M. K., Dodge, T., Squire, K., & Newell, M. (2004). Critical design ethnography: Designingfor change. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 35(2), 254–268.Barron, B., & Bell, P. (2015). Learning environments in and out of school. In L. Corno & E. Anderman (Eds.),Handbook of Educational Psychology (3rd Ed) (pp. 323-336). New York: Routledge, Taylor & Francis.Barron, B., Martin, C.K., Takeuchi, L., & Fithian, R. (2009). Parents as learning partners in the development oftechnological fluency. The International Journal of Learning and Media, 1(2), 55-77.Beach, K. (1999). Consequential transitions: A developmental view of knowledge propagation through socialorganizations. Review of Research in Education, 24(1), 101–139.Bell, P., Lewenstein, B., Shouse, A.W. & Feder, M.A. (2009). Learning science in informal environments: People,places, and pursuits. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Bell, P., Tzou, C., Bricker, L. A., & Baines, A. D. (2012). Learning in diversities of structures of social practice:Accounting for how, why and where people learn science. Human Development, 55(5-6), 269-284.Brown, J.S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. EducationalResearcher, 18(1), 32-42.Calabrese Barton, A. C., & Brickhouse, N. (2006). Engaging girls in science. In C. Skelton, B. Francis, & L.Smulyan (Eds.), The Sage handbook of gender and education (pp. 221-235). Thousand Oaks, CA: SagePublications.Calabrese Barton, A., Kang, H., Tan, E., O’Neill, T.B., Bautista-Guerra, J., & Brecklin, C., (2013). Crafting afuture in science: Tracing middle school girls’ identity work over time and space. American EducationalResearch Journal, 50(1), 37-75.Derry, S., Pea, R., Barron, B., Engle, R., Erickson, F., Goldman, R., Hall, R., et al. (2010). Conducting videoresearch in the learning sciences: guidance on selection, analysis, technology, and ethics. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 19(1), 3-53.González, N., Moll, L. C., & Amanti, C. (2005). Funds of knowledge: theorizing practices in households,communities, and classrooms. New York: Routledge.1193Goodwin, C. (2000). Action and embodiment within situated human interaction. Journal of Pragmatics, 32, 1489–1522.Goodwin, C. (2007). Participation, stance and affect in the organization of activities. Discourse & Society, 18(1,Special issue: Morality as family practice), 53–73.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Jurow, A. S. (2016). Social design experiments: Toward equity by design. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 25(4), 565-598.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Rogoff, B. (2003). Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits or repertoires of practice.Educational Researcher, 32(5), 19-25.Hammer, D. M., Elby, A., Scherr, R. E., & Redish, E. F. (2005). Resources, framing, and transfer. In J. Mestre(Ed.), Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective (pp. 89-120). Greenwich, CT:Information Age Publishing.John-Steiner, V. (2000). Creative Collaboration. Oxford University Press.Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the LearningSciences, 4, 39-103.Kafai, Y. B., & Resnick, M. (1996). Constructionism in practice: Designing, thinking, and learning in a digitalworld. Routledge.Katz, V.S. (2014). Kids in the middle: How children of immigrants negotiate community interactions for theirfamilies. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge [England]; NewYork: Cambridge University Press.Luce, M. R., Goldman, S. V., & Vea, T. (2017). Designing for family science explorations anytime, anywhere.Science Education, 101(2), 251-277.Moll, L. C., Amanti, C., Neff, D., & Gonzalez, N. (1992). Funds of knowledge for teaching: Using a qualitativeapproach to connect homes and classrooms. Theory into Practice, 31(2), 132–141.Nasir, N. S., & Hand, V. (2008). From the court to the classroom: Opportunities for engagement, learning, andidentity in basketball and classroom mathematics. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17(2), 143–179.Nasir, N. S., Rosebery, A., Warren, B., & Lee, C. D. (2014). Learning as a cultural process: Achieving equitythrough diversity. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (2nd Ed) (pp.686-706). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. Basic Books, Inc.Pinkard, N. & Austin, K. (2014). The Digital Youth Network Learning Model. In Barron, B., Gomez, K., Pinkard,N., & Martin C.K. The Digital Youth Network: Cultivating Digital Media Citizenship in UrbanCommunities. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.Prins, H. (2002). Visual Media and the Primitivist Perplex Colonial Fantasies, Indigenous Imagination, andAdvocacy. Media worlds: Anthropology on new terrain (pp. 58-74). University of California Press.Roque, R. (2016). Family Creative Learning. In K. Peppler, E. Halverson, & Y. B. Kafai (Eds.), Makeology:Makerspaces as learning environments (p. 47-63). London: Routledge.Rosebery, A., Warren, B., Ballenger, C., & Ogonowski, M. (2005). The generative potential of students' everydayknowledge in learning science. In T. Romberg, T. Carpenter, & F. Dremock (Eds.), Understandingmathematics and science matters (pp. 55-80). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Stringer, E. T. (2013). Action research. Sage Publications.Tzou, C., Bell, P., Bang, M., Kuver, R., Twito, A., & Braun, A. (submitted, July 2017). Building expansive familySTEAM programming through participatory design research.Vossoughi, S., Hooper, P. K., & Escudé, M. (2016). Making through the lens of culture and power: Towardtransformative visions for educational equity. Harvard Educational Review, 86(2), 206–232.Warren, B., Ballenger, C., Ogonowski, M., Rosebery, A. S., & Hudicourt-Barnes, J. (2001). Rethinking diversityin learning science: The logic of everyday sense-making. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38,529-552.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1194© ISLS