How Do Kindergarten and Primary School Children Justify TheirDecisions on Planning Science Experiments?Heidi Haslbeck, Technical University of Munich, Heidi.haslbeck@tum.deEva-Maria Lankes, Technical University of Munich, Lankes@tum.deEva S. Fritzsche, Technical University of Munich, eva.fritzsche@tum.deLucia Kohlhauf, University of Munich LMU, Lucia.Kohlhauf@biologie.uni-muenchen.deBirgit J. Neuhaus, University of Munich LMU, birgit.neuhaus@lrz.uni-muenchen.deAbstract: The ability to test questions and assumptions autonomously by systematicmanipulation of variables in an experiment is a central aspect during designing andconducting scientific investigations. It is unknown if children already use the control ofvariable strategy (CVS) as their argumentation strategy for designing experiments. Wecompare which argumentation strategy children use to justify their decisions on planningscience experiments. Primary school children more often chose non-confounded experimentscompared to kindergarten children.IntroductionScientific thinking includes problem-solving procedures like formulating research questions, generatinghypotheses, designing and conducting investigations and interpreting data as part of inquiry competences(Harwood, 2004). The ability to test questions and assumptions autonomously by systematic manipulation ofvariables in an experiment (Control of Variable Strategy; CVS) is a central aspect during designing andconducting scientific investigations (Klahr & Nigam, 2004).Psychological studies have shown that children at the pre- and primary school age already can learn thebasics of CVS and can in an easy way distinguish between confounded and non-confounded experiments(Sodian & Mayer, 2013). But is not known if children use the CVS as their argumentation strategy for designingexperiments. They might also use another strategy, for example, a normative reference (Walton, Reed, &Macagni, 2013). Students need not only be able to distinguish between confounded and non-confoundedexperiments, but they need to be able to justify their decisions. It is possible that children choose the rightanswer and refer correctly to the CVS in their argumentation, but it may also happen that they choose the rightanswer by chance.The research questions of this study are as follows:RQ1: Which argumentation strategies do children in kindergarten and primary school apply?RQ2: Having chosen a non-confounded experiment how often do children apply a wrongargumentation strategy?Method21 kindergarten children and 22 primary school children participated in the study. Kindergarten children`s meanage was 5.28 years (SD = .72) and 33.3% of the children were boys. The mean age of the primary schoolchildren was 9.18 years (SD = .501) and 54.5% were boys.To assess children`s scientific thinking and argumentation strategies we introduced a scientific questionof an everyday situation and showed the children confounded and non-confounded experiments to answer thequestion. The children had to decide which experiment is the best way to answer the question. Afterwards, weasked the children why they had chosen the respective experiment. We also asked the primary school children todesign their own experiments to given scientific questions and justify their design. All tasks were constructedbased on existing tasks (Sodian et al., 1991, Bullock & Ziegler, 1999, Schwichow, Christoph, Boone, & Härtig,2016). The reliability of the scale for planning experiments was α = .67 (primary school children; 12 items) andα = .73 (kindergarten children 16 items).We also assessed data about children’s general cognitive skills (CFT, Weiß & Osterland, 2013). Theknowledge of the kindergarten children was assessed by interviews, the knowledge of the primary schoolchildren with a paper-and-pencil test.Open answers were coded into a categorization scheme (see Edelsbrunner & Deiglmayr, 2017) whichhas been complemented with additional categories. The complete data were coded independently by two trainedcoders who reached high inter-rater reliability (Cohen’s kappa = .83). The scheme has seven main categories:tautological reasoning, normative reasoning, outcome-based reasoning, precise hint to experimental variation,ICLS 2018 Proceedings1601© ISLSprecise and correct hint to one factor, precise and correct hint to two or more factors, not possible to categorize.The categories “precise hint to experimental variation, precise and correct hint to one factor, precise and correcthint to two or more factors” were coded as right answers because the children showed a basic understanding ofthe CVS.ResultsKindergarten and primary school children both used all argumentation strategies. Answers like “I don`t know”were excluded from the analyses. To compare kindergarten and primary school children we report percentages.The kindergarten children used a normative reasoning more often than the school children. Kindergartenchildren also mentioned more often a precise hint to one factor. Primary school children more often usedtautological reasoning strategies and more often gave a hint to two or more factors.There were also differences in the argumentation strategies in combination with right or wrong answersand argumentation strategies. Primary school children more often chose the right answer (68.94%) compared tokindergarten children (23.81%). Primary school children often did not use an argumentation strategy referring tothe CVS (62.63%). If Kindergarten children chose the right answer, they used almost always the rightargumentation strategy (83.33%).There was a significant correlation between the general cognitive abilities and the skill “planningexperiments” for primary school children (r = .56, p = .006) and also for kindergarten children(r = .66, p = .006).DiscussionThe results show that children in early years can already identify or plan non-confounded experiments but forprimary school children it is difficult to use the right argumentation strategy. As children are able to use theCVS, one possible implication for the daily work in kindergartens and primary schools could be that teachersand educators should foster that children justify decisions with the CVS. For future research, it would beinteresting to investigate how to support the teachers and educators in this task. We will increase the overallnumber of participants within the next few months to present more robust results at the conference.ReferencesBullock, M., & Ziegler, A. (1999). Scientific reasoning: Developmental and individual differences. InIndividual development from 3 to 12: Findings from the Munich Longitudinal Study (pp. 38-54).Cambridge University PressEdelsbrunner, P. A., & Deiglmayr, A. (2017). Argumentation about the Control of Variables-Strategy: A largescale Study in Primary School. Talk at the 17th Biennial Conference of the European Association forResearch in Learning and Instruction. Tampere, Finland.Harwood, W. S. (2004). A new model for inquiry—is the scientific method dead? Journal of College ScienceTeaching, 33 (7), 29 – 33.Klahr, D., & Nigam, M. (2004). The equivalence of learning paths in early science instruction: Effects of directinstruction and discovery learning. Psychological science, 15(10), 661-667.Schwichow, M., Christoph S., Boone W. J., & Härtig H.(2016): The impact of sub-skills and item content onstudents’ skills with regard to the control of-variables strategy, International Journal of ScienceEducation, 38 (2). S.216-237, doi: 10.1080/09500693.2015.1137651Sodian, B., Zaitchik, D., & Carey, S. (1991). Young children's differentiation of hypothetical beliefs fromevidence. Child Development, 62(4), 753-766.Sodian, B., & Mayer, D. (2013). Entwicklung des wissenschaftlichen Denkens im Vor-und Grundschulalter. InM. Stamm & D. Edelmann (Hrsg.), Handbuch frühkindliche Bildungsforschung (pp. 617-631).Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden.Walton, D., Reed, C., & Macagno, F. (2008). Argumentation schemes. Cambridge University Press.Weiß, R., & Osterland, J. (2013). Grundintelligenztest Skala 1. HogrefeICLS 2018 Proceedings1602© ISLS