Leveraging MOOCs for Blended Learning: Capturing Effective‘Wrapping’ Strategies With a Learning Design Pattern LanguageLing Li, University of Hong Kong, lingli.edu@hku.hkNancy Law, University of Hong Kong, nlaw@hku.hkAbstract: There is an emerging trend to deploy MOOC resources in blended courses. Thisstudy aims to explore a systematic strategy for pedagogically productive exploitations ofMOOC course designs in blended contexts. Adopting a design pattern language, this studydocuments and compares the learning designs of a Java course offered in both a fully onlineand a blended mode, so as to identify effective pedagogical patterns in transforming MOOCsto blended learning.IntroductionThe implications of massive open online course (MOOCs) have been widely expanded in the higher educationlandscape. Following the development of SPOCs (small private online courses), BOOCs (big open onlinecourses) and DOCCs (distributed online collaborative courses), another new model is emerging, which usesMOOCs to support blended course design (Bruff, 2012; Bruff, Fisher, McEwen, & Smith, 2013; Caulfield,2012a, 2012b; Fisher, 2012; Holotescu, Grosseck, Cretu, & Naaji, 2014). In this model, MOOCs, which havethe functions of lecturing, testing and discussion, are regarded as ‘super-textbooks’, around which localinstructors ‘wrap’ a set of in-class activities to customize their own courses. This approach promotes theexchange of learning design and materials in an online teaching community and opens up a new way to makeuse of MOOCs. However, building a blended course that incorporates an existing self-contained MOOC withthe fixed content authored by another instructor can be challenging (Bruff et al., 2013; Caulfield, 2012a). Thedifferent targeted learners and manners of delivery, and the two instructors (in the video and the classroom) whomay or may not hold the same view on the course content, could all be obstacles to a coherent coupling ofonline and offline components.A small number of educational researchers and practitioners have been discussing and experimentingwith effective strategies to build blended courses around MOOCs (Bruff, 2012; Bruff et al., 2013; Caulfield,2012b; Fisher, 2012; Holotescu et al., 2014). These studies have identified various techniques that can usefullycomplement, extend and deepen the existing online components, such as creating small groupdiscussions/activities, adding additional/challenging materials, clarifying concepts and questions shooting (ibid).Although these techniques are very effective practices in wrapping MOOCs, they are captured and presented asisolated ideas rather than as working parts of integrated approaches of teaching. The learning experience that ablended course creates for students is supposed to be fundamental and far-reaching (Garrison & Kanuka, 2004;Graham, 2006). When instructors develop a blended course, they cannot merely focus on instructionaltechniques by adding a group activity here and a different resource there. Instead, they should be cognizant of aspectrum of pedagogical approaches that organically synthesize across face-to-face and online components,through which the targeted learning outcomes can be effectively tackled. However, there has yet to be anysystematic, well-documented and pedagogically-grounded strategies that teachers can draw upon whentransforming MOOCs to a blended mode.This study was set out to explore and develop a repertoire of pedagogically productive wrappingstrategies that teachers can apply in developing blended courses from MOOCs. Adopting a learning designpattern language, this study documents and compares the learning designs of a Java course in both a fully onlineand a blended mode, in order to identify effective pedagogical patterns in transforming MOOCs to blendedlearning.A learning design pattern languageWe argue that systematic pedagogical deployment should focus on pedagogical patterns (Goodyear, 2005;Laurillard, 2012) as basic units in transforming MOOCs to blended mode. The learning design pattern language(Law, Li, Herrera, & Salas-Pilco, 2017) adopted in this study provides a research-based design language forclear representation of patterns in a systematic way. Specifically, the pattern language encompasseshierarchically nested structures that capture a course design at different levels of granularity: course, learningunits and learning tasks (Figure 1). So instead of capturing fragmented techniques, the multilevel languageallows us to document the dynamic process and the complete pedagogical approach in which the techniques areICLS 2018 Proceedings1545© ISLSembedded. This allows us to make visible the tacit knowledge of instructors’ design thinking, and distil theeffective design patterns that can play out in other contexts.Figure 1. The hierarchically embedded 3-level structure of the learning design pattern language.Research method and data collectionThis study documents and compares the learning designs of the fully online and the blended modes of the Javacourse. Two research methods were adopted to obtain the required data. The first and primary method wasobservation. We have two team members auditing, in the role of students, both the fully online (archived) andthe blended Java courses, and documenting the learning designs using the pattern language. In the meantime, wehave conducted two rounds of interviews with the instructor to validate our documentation of the learningdesigns.FindingsA series of design patterns have been captured from the two modes of the Java course. The findings show howthe same learning outcome objectives were delivered differently in the two modes of the Java course. With thelearning design pattern language, we are able to capture and present the instructor’s MOOC-wrappingtechniques in coherent pedagogical patterns. This allows us to see adequately how the different designcomponents, online and offline, work together to generate transformative learning experience. In the postersession, we will present the full set of effective design patterns that we have identified in transforming MOOCsto blended contexts. They are envisioned to form a repertoire of strategies to support instructors’experimentations with leveraging MOOCs for blended learning.ReferencesBruff, D., Fisher, D. H., McEwen, K. E., & Smith, B. E. (2013). Wrapping a MOOC: Student perceptions of anexperimentin blended learning. Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, 9(2), 187.Caulfield, M. (2012, November 9). How Coursera Could Walk the Talk About MOOC-wrapping. Retrievedfrom https://hapgood.us/2012/11/09/how-coursera-could-walk-the-talk-about-mooc-wrapping/.Fisher,D.(2012,November7).WarmingUptoMOOCs.Retrievedfromhttps://news.vanderbilt.edu/2012/12/07/doug-fisher-warming-up-to-moocs/.Garrison, D. R., & Kanuka, H. (2004). Blended learning: Uncovering its transformative potential in highereducation. The Internet and Higher Education, 7(2), 95–105.Goodyear, P. (2005). Educational design and networked learning: Patterns, pattern languages and designpractice. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 21(1).Graham, C. R. (2006). Blended learning systems: Definition, current trends, and future directions. In C. J. Bonk& C. R. Graham (Eds.), The handbook of blended learning (pp. 3–21). San Francisco, CA: Preiffer.Holotescu, C., Grosseck, G., Cretu, V., & Naaji, A. (2014). Integrating MOOCs in blended courses. In TheInternational Scientific Conference eLearning and Software for Education, 4, 243, National DefenceUniversity.Law, N., Li, L., Herrera, L. F., & Salas-Pilco, S., Z. (2017). Bridging learning analytics to learning designthrough a pattern language based learning design studio. Paper presented in DesignLAK17 Workshop,Vancouver: LAK Conference.AcknowledgmentThis project is funded by the Innovation and Technology Commission of the HKSAR Government (InnovativeTechnology Fund, grant number ITS/306/15FP.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1546© ISLS