From Quantified Self to Building a More Fit Community: DataTracking and Science Infographics as Boundary ObjectsStephen R. Sommer, University of Colorado Boulder, stephen.sommer@colorado.eduJoseph L. Polman, University of Colorado Boulder, joseph.polman@colorado.eduAbstract: This design case study considers one teacher's use of two socio-technologicallyenhanced supports to promote students' thinking across boundaries. Quantified self biometrictracking technology is used to capture data related to students' physical experience while aninfographics authoring activity is utilized to afford students making sense of these data,synthesizing disciplinary knowledge, and ultimately producing public knowledge artifacts fortheir communities. The designed integration of these technologies allows and demands thatstudents connect their personal experiences to disciplinary ideas and practices as well as to anaudience of their local school community.Introduction and purposeThis design case study considers how student generated infographics can be incorporated into content driven,formal learning spaces as tools to cross disciplinary boundaries, incorporate students' experiences, andauthentically engage communities. During a ten-week health and fitness class, high school students used anensemble of technologies to record and catalog their own physical fitness, engage with new content knowledgeand generate a series of their own science news infographics that related their findings and claims to the largerschool community. Infographics are multipart visual representations of complex data and concepts that presentscientific data, ideas, and arguments to an audience. Student generated infographics became artifacts that servedas boundary objects that encouraged students to reflect on and synthesize their own experiences, builddisciplinary knowledge, and express their agency and capacity to affect change in their communities. In thisFitness for Life (FfL) class, students gathered biosensor and self-report information, particular kinds ofquantified self (QS) data, as an entry point for understanding and reflecting on their everyday practices relatedto fitness and health. Simultaneously, students integrated and synthesized disciplinary content knowledgerelated to biology, health, and mathematics to produce a series of 'public service announcement' infographicswith data visualizations geared towards various community audiences.The FfL course is one of many classes that are part of our broader project, STEM Literacy throughInfographics (SLI), that considers how to best design learning environments to foster students' STEM (science,technology, engineering, and mathematics) literacy in an era of a vast amount of data presented in a multitude ofrepresentational forms. We are concerned with how the use of technology and various representationalmodalities can bolster student self-reflection, discourse, and learning across disciplinary boundaries. In thispaper, we examine how this teacher adapted a general model for infographics integration to include quantifiedself data. The course was designed to make visible students' everyday experience, consider these QS data inrelation to new disciplinary content knowledge, and ultimately synthesize their multi-dimensional learning tomake predictions about their own future health and recommendations for a public audience.Theoretical frameworkThe SLI project is driven by a socio-culturally informed design principle of "contextualizing science in life"(Polman, Gebre, & Graville, 2014). We encourage teachers to invoke students' own experiences, makeconnections across disciplinary boundaries, and challenge students to communicate complex ideas to a varietyof public audiences in multiple contexts. Student generated infographics serve as mediating artifacts (Wertsch,1998) that allow for presentation, synthesis, and integration of multiple forms and sources of knowledge. In thissense, the infographic artifacts allow students to span various boundaries, disciplinary or otherwise. As therecontinues to be increased specialization in disciplinary knowledge, boundaries manifest as what Akkerman &Bakker (2011) call "socio-cultural differences leading to discontinuity in interaction or action" (p. 152). Suchboundaries not only divide disciplinary knowledge, but also divorce students' lived experience and out of schoollearning from classroom content. We see student generated infographics serving as boundary objects that cutacross social worlds and sites of discourse, or otherwise enable bridging (see also Polman & Hope, 2012). Thesesorts of boundary objects inhabit multiple worlds and become grounding artifacts where multiple fields ofinquiry or practice can interact. Infographics as boundary object allow for students to dialogically hybridize andengage multiple fields of knowing in discourse (Akkerman & Bakker, 2011). As a result, boundary crossing canlead to increased student agency, new forms of community engagement, and ultimately transformation.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1001© ISLSTransformation may occur as students identify their own positioning across several domains and coordinatediverse perspectives, experiences and ideas through communicative connection and translation.The framing of infographics as mediating artifacts and boundary crossing objects pairs nicely with agrowing interest in and access to the 'quantified self' (QS) movement in educational technology and design. QSinvolves 'extended tracking and analysis of personally relevant data' (Lee, 2014, p. 1032), that is innatelyinteresting to active learners (Moher et al., 2014). While many initiatives intended to teach students data literacyprimarily focus on accessing and understanding large existing data sets (Hammerman, 2009), QS interventionsdraw on students' authentic, lived experience as primary source material for analysis. Data collected throughanalog practices like journaling or technologically enhanced means such as wearable devices often revealpatterns and phenomena about one's own embodied experience that are otherwise not visible. These sorts ofsocio-technological systems can be used to support knowledge building and knowledge sharing in highlyparticipatory learning environments integrating multiple dimensions of knowledge (Lee, 2014). Scientific ideasderived from instruction, QS data from students' own bodies, and knowledge from other classes each serve asindividual 'inscriptions' of student experiences (Latour, 1990). By curating and organizing these variousinscriptions into a cohesive visual argument, students can use infographics to represent an accumulation orcascade of inscriptions, mobilizing multiple knowledges that transcend established boundaries.Research context and methodsData for this analysis are primarily drawn from one teacher's reflection on the design and implementation of hercourse, supplemented by other artifacts. We consider three structured interviews with the instructor Abby (apseudonym), her course planning materials, two observational field notes, and the student generatedinfographics that happened in four cycles. The analysis here is a case study of the designed learningenvironment and the teacher's perspective of how the course provided opportunities for and demands forstudents to develop their thinking and ideas.The Fitness for Life course was designed by Abby in the fall of 2016 after she attended a weeklongprofessional development regarding integrating data literacy and infographics into the classroom. The coursetook place at an ethnically, socioeconomically and geographically diverse, residential high school in theintermountain West of the United States designed for students that were not finding success in traditional schoolsettings. Five students participated in this ten-week class that met for forty sessions, each lasting 2.25 hours.Abby's initial course proposal outlined student learning objectives including "Learning about their own bodiesand how to take ownership of their health...[to] connect this to the real world," and "predict how their diet andexercise habits will influence their future lives." Abby designed the course to be interactive, multi-disciplinary,and draw on variety of student funds of knowledge. Abby noted, "I don't really think you can engage inunderstanding about our bodies, fitness, or health without understanding at least some level biology and math."Case study findingsAbby's curriculum and design activities were enhanced through two socio-technically supported mediatingsystems; infographics and technology to track biometric data. Student generated infographics were integratedinto the curriculum as platforms for students to synthesize content knowledge and their own lived experiencesinto tangible artifacts that would be shared with community members. Abby reflected, "When I went to theinfographics [professional development] institute, it was like a light bulb ... infographics are this perfect vehicleto teach them things about how to make a graph and y=mx+b and p-values, and then how to relate that to thebiology we learned in class, and how does that relate to community ... and to see how they are integrating all ofthese things." Four cycles of infographic activities (Table 1) were built into this class.Table 1: The four cycles of infographic assignments in the Fitness for Life classContentAudienceDataSource5 elements offitness (Week 1)InstructorClass SyllabusObesity & Fitness(Week 3)Youthinstruction onbiology & healthOpen Choice(Week 6)AdolescentsSynthesis of Class & QSData (Week 10)'future self' & schoolinstruction on biology,math & public health10 weeks all instruction& biometric dataAbby also designed the class so that students would track their own biometric data throughout the semester inanalog fashion and with technologically supported systems. Students kept daily written logs that tracked thingsICLS 2018 Proceedings1002© ISLSlike the amount of sleep they got, general mood, and specific logs related to exercise routines (e.g., number ofsit ups, push ups, or times for cardio events). In addition, each student was issued a FitBit to track biometricdata from the beginning to the end the semester. She explained that students, "don't realize we are tracking dataabout our life or making predictions for the future, I think we just do it automatically and I try and teach mystudents to do it explicitly as there is an inherent math component at being good at doing fitness."Each of the four units culminated in the production of a student created infographic artifact geared for aparticular audience. The first week students completed an introductory infographic to become familiar with theonline design canvas and recognize the five elements of fitness that would be covered in the class. For the nextunit covering childhood obesity, the expectation of providing a visually appealing, scientifically relevantargument by way of a public service announcement infographic was paramount. Abby explained "They areasked to create an infographic that would be appealing to the child, like real colorful... but it would also beinformative for the parent who is making a decision about how to help [their] kid stay healthy." Here, studentsdid not simply demonstrate comprehension of content knowledge, rather they used this information to formpersuasive arguments towards a real audience. In the third unit, students could choose their own topic so long asit related to adolescent health. Students were to 'pick a position and convince' their peers of a fitness relatedtopic. Examples included the dangers of steroids, importance of stretching, strategies for increasing musclemass, etc. The final project required that the students somehow integrate the quantified self-data they hadgathered over the ten weeks with the interdisciplinary content they had learned in class. Abby explained, "So theidea is for them to see this change over your body, and you have hopefully learned enough biology and math tosay why these changes take place. And what was happening inside your muscles or lungs that made your heartrate decrease? And how does this relate to the information you learned? And what is your plan for the future?And how does this relate to other community health concerns?" Figure 1 shows an excerpt of a studentinfographic that uses the calculated slope of her fitness gains to make predictions about her future performanceand various aspects of her changing health. These final infographics that synthesized students' own habits,content knowledge, and community recommendations were then displayed in the school gym and studentfindings were shared at their end of semester school wide oral presentations.Abby structured the FfL class around a school learning objective of 'creating healthy life choices.' Forher, this required much more than students simply understanding disciplinary knowledge related to health,biology, or mathematics. Her goal was for students to make informed decisions about their own practices, setgoals for the future, and be able to offer informed opinions to their peers and community members. Sheexplained, "The theory was to take this individual information, like I saw this happen to me and then relate it toscientific knowledge, and then relate it in a way that would somehow be beneficial to the community." Thequantified self data helped reveal students' own routines while the infographics served both as a platform forpersonal synthesis and integration, and also as a medium to communicate interdisciplinary knowledge to abroader audience. In this sense, these technologies helped students cross several boundaries (see Figure 2).Figure 1. One excerpt from a student generated infographic tracking change in fitness and health over time.Figure 2. The infographic serves as a mediating object to assist in at least three distinct boundary crossings.The first boundary students in the FfL class crossed (B1) concerns a distinction between individuallyenacted experiences and disciplinary content knowledge. From the very start of the course students completeddaily health and fitness logs and were encouraged to wear FitBit devices 24/7. Through this analog andtechnologically supported tracking, students' individually enacted practices began to be made visible by way of'raw' or unprocessed data (e.g., spreadsheets with quantities). Yet, despite these data being 'visible' by way ofrecording and display, the data lacked meaning in that they were not yet directly tied to the learning studentswere doing in the FfL course nor were patterns obvious. Through classroom instruction, Abby hoped thatstudents would be enabled to draw connections between the math, health and biology content represented inICLS 2018 Proceedings1003© ISLStheir own quantified self-data. She explained, "I really hoped [the infographic] would be a platform that thestudents could use to integrate and then showcase their knowledge... This is about real life, not just a class. Andif you drill down to that base level, you have to be interdisciplinary." The quantified self data made visiblestudents own daily practices and through the mediation and synthesis afforded by the infographic authoring,students were challenged to integrate this knowledge with the disciplinary content provided through instruction.The second boundary crossing (B2) concerns the distinction between academic disciplines themselves.Often increased specialization, particular methods, or isolated literatures prevent integration of contentknowledge across disciplinary boundaries (Akkerman & Bakker, 2011). By design, Abby worked to provideplatforms for students to synthesize and integrate multiple forms of knowing drawing from math, health, andbiology. The quantified self data provide personalized numerical fodder for analysis while infographic authoringaffords a space to synthesize. She explained, "[The infographic] let me see how the person is relating to thisknowledge...so it is really interesting for me as an instructor, from a formative and then summative perspective,to see how they are putting things together." Students do not simply demonstrate competence in one scholasticdiscipline, instead they are challenged to use the infographic to synthesize different content knowledge into acoherent argument for a specific audience or to make predictions for their future selves.The third boundary crossing (B3) in the FfL course concerns a move from individual knowledgecomprehension to public engagement in the students' communities. Abby explained that each student consideredand was motivated by the fact that their final products would be printed and displayed around their school space.She explained that she did not want students to "just type up a paper, like some boring rote thing," but insteadcreate a visual artifact that would have some immediate effect in the school community. She was surprised thatafter students completed their final products, they requested that they could hold a non-required schoolgathering to share their findings with peers and staff. In fact, the students had calculated predictions about thechange in overall fitness of the campus population if new protocols were enacted regarding where the busesregularly parked. If the buses stopped further down the hill, students predicted that their peers may lose 1.5pounds over the course of a semester. As students' awareness of their fitness crossed personal and disciplinaryboundaries, the teacher saw their agency and desire to affect change in their lives and communities asincreasing.Conclusion and significanceThis case study of the Fitness for Life class design demonstrates how a teacher working across disciplinary andspatial boundaries can invite student synthesis and integration of multiple forms of knowledge. The inclusion ofquantified self (QS) data as primary research fodder and the use of infographics as mediating artifacts that spanboundaries grounded learning in students' own experience and expanded this to public engagement. QS trackingmade visible students' tacit fitness habits as raw data, the integration of design synthesizing content knowledgeadded meaning to these data, and the production of public facing infographic artifacts challenged students tocommunicate their findings as scientifically sound and persuasive claims to affect positive change acrossexisting boundaries. This variety of socio-technically enhanced learning originating in students livedexperiences and realized in public expands the use of QS educational technology beyond the individual andinvokes community as a way to drive engagement and learning. Future socio-technically enhanced learninginterventions may benefit from designing learning environments around the use of cascading inscriptions thatdraw on students' authentic experience and incrementally build towards public engagement.ReferencesAkkerman, S. F., & Bakker, A. (2011). Boundary crossing and boundary objects. Review of EducationalResearch, 81(2), 132–169.Hammerman, J. K. L. (2009, April). Educating about statistical issues using large scientific data sets.Paper presented at the AERA Annual Meeting, San Diego, CALatour, B. (1990). Drawing things together. In M. Lynch, & Woolgar, S. (Ed.), Representation in scientificpractice (pp. 19-68). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Lee, V. R. (2013). The Quantified Self (QS) movement and some emerging opportunities for the educationaltechnology field. Educational Technology, (November-December 2013), 39.Moher, T., Ching, C. C., Schaefer, S., Lee, V. R., Enyedy, N., Danish, J., ... & Rubin, A. (2014). Becomingreflective: Designing for reflection on physical performances. ICLS 2014 Proceedings, 1273-1282.Polman, J. L., Gebre, E., and Graville, C. (2014, March). Contextualizing science in life through science newsinfographic design and publication. Paper presented at the NARST Annual Meeting, Pittsburgh, PA.Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. New York: Oxford University Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1004© ISLS