Creativity as a Lens to Frame Teachers’ Use of Games for LearningMamta Shah, Drexel University, mamta@drexel.eduTeacher education in game-based learningLeading scholars in the field have theorized digital games as contexts with potential to promote “situatedunderstandings, effective social practices, powerful identities, shared values, and ways of thinking of importantcommunities of practice” (Shaffer, Squire, Halverson & Gee, 2005, p.7). Researchers have illustrated the use ofgames to support learners’ personal identity and goals towards engagement in academic domains and professionalcareers (Foster, 2008; Squire, 2010). However, despite educational researchers’ demonstrated attempts tocapitalize on the potential of games for enhancing students’ curricular experiences, research on educating teachersin incorporating games in their practice is severely lacking at both pre-service and in-service levels (Molin, 2017;Shah, 2015). This is problematic given that immersive and interactive digital technologies such as games arefundamentally shifting teachers’ pedagogical roles in orchestrating student learning. Shaffer and colleagues(2015) argue that these shifts necessitate a complete re-envisioning of how teachers are prepared to designexperiences and facilitate learning in digitally-evolving classroom ecologies.Few, but powerful exemplars exist in the extant literature to illuminate how a skilled teacher works insynergy with a well-designed game to facilitate students’ personally relevant engagement with academic materialin game-based classrooms (Eastwood & Sadler, 2013; Silseth, 2012). Even fewer studies have (a) defined theknowledge and skills that are germane for teachers to identify and leverage the educational potential of games(Foster, Shah & Duvall, 2015; Shah & Foster, 2015), (b) illustrated the process of supporting teachers’ motivationto incorporate games in their practice (Chee, Mehrotra & Ong, 2015; Foster & Shah, 2017), and (c) documentedhow teachers’ roles and practice in teaching with games evolve over time (Bell & Gresalfi, 2017; Shah & Foster,2014b). The emergent status of research on teacher education in game-based learning (GBL) is disadvantageousto teachers’ growing interest in employing games for teaching, learning and assessment and the field of gamesand learning at large (Takeuchi & Vaala, 2014). In the absence of comprehensive approaches for supportingteachers to innovate in their practice using games, teachers are likely (a) to not consider all aspects of games thatcan impact student learning (e.g. teachers seek obvious content alignment to curriculum but do not have aconsideration for inherent pedagogical approach), (b) to resort to using games as standalone tools for review andpractice but not as ecosystems of designed experiences for students to explore their interests in (Shah, 2015; Shah& Foster, 2018). I argue that recent research on creativity and educational technology offers a useful lens to framehow we support teachers to cultivate analytical and pedagogical skills that may be beneficial for them to constantlyinnovate their practice by identifying, examining, designing, and repurposing technologically-mediatedexperiences and environments for learning.Teachers, games, and creativityLarry Cuban (1986) documented teachers’ adoption of radio, television, computers- technologies that wereclaimed to catalyze transformational changes in formal education since the 1920s. His work underscored thesignificance of teachers’ roles as gatekeepers of technological and pedagogical innovations in schools.Technologies of today are rapidly changing; they are more complex than before in the kinds of experiences theycan afford, and they transcend traditional barriers of physical and social spaces of inquiry, communication,construction, and expression (Foster & Shah, 2015a; Shah & Foster, 2015). Thus, if teachers are to be inventivein their use of technology in their curriculum, teachers need to be supported to develop the skill set to creativelyexamine and repurpose technology for educational purposes (Henriksen, Mishra & Mehta, 2015; Mishra, Koehler& Henriksen, 2010). Thus, in order to repurpose games for learning, teachers should be supported in (a) perceivinggames in a novel way (something that did not exist in this form before), (b) designing curricular experiences usinga chosen game in an effective manner (something that does the job better than before), and (c) considering the roleof the context in choosing and repurposing a games for a specific learning objective in a wholesome manner(something that ties with the context). I illustrate this creative view of supporting teachers to use games throughan excerpt from my dissertation research (Shah, 2015).The mixed-methods study investigated the development and assessment of 14 pre-service teachers’knowledge of game-based learning using the Game Network Analysis (GaNA) framework (Foster, 2012) over11-weeks. The framework includes a focus on the pedagogy and content of games as well as the process foremploying game-based learning in classrooms in formal and informal settings (Foster, 2012). GaNA comprisesof an analytical lens for game analysis and selection by helping teachers approach the game as a curriculum withconstraints and affordances for technology, pedagogy, and content (Foster, 2012). It includes Play CurricularICLS 2018 Proceedings1869© ISLSactivity Reflection Discussion (PCaRD) model that aids teachers in (a) the systematic incorporation of games inclassrooms in order to flexibly accommodate challenges inherent in a typical school structure; (b) the design oflearning environments where student engagement, teacher intervention, curricular inquiry are in synergy; and (c)overcoming limitations of the games being used (Foster & Shah, 2015b). GaNA facilitates teachers in designingopportunities for inquiry, communication, construction, and expression to foster transformative learningexperiences anchored in the game (Foster & Shah, 2015a). The decisions teachers make during game analysis andgame integration are guided by ecological conditions impacting the successful use of GBL experiences. Theseconditions include social dynamics, organizational and technological infrastructure, and pedagogical culture ofthe context in which GBL is to be introduced. In this way, GaNA offers one methodological tool kit to use gamesin new ways.Creative repurposing of Minecraft for English/Language Arts using GaNAMax (pseudonym) was a graduate male student who specialized in Secondary education in English/Language. Hehad no prior training in game-based learning and was interested in incorporating environments such as Minecraftas a way for highschool students to explore elements of good storytelling. Through the 11-weeks, Max was guidedto learn about games through direct (playing) and vicarious approaches (researching websites, watching Youtubevideos, reading empirical literature), concentrating on the games’ content, pedagogical, and technologicalcharacteristics (Foster, 2012). Max learnt to play and see games in ways that he had never seen before. He learntthat playing Minecraft naturally involved exploring one’s narrative experience and learning about cause andeffect. Every choice the player made during their individual experience contributed to the final outcome (survival).For instance, if players spent a majority of their time digging holes and searching for minerals, they might nothave time to build adequate shelter, and find themselves unprotected from monsters, making them susceptible todeath. He believed this example and others he articulated were applicable to students’ understanding of literatureas narratives and character arcs contain many examples of cause and effect. Max was also able to comprehendthat while students may learn from their own mistakes or decisions while playing, Minecraft did not explicitlyprovide opportunities for students to show their understanding of cause and effect as a narrative element.Additionally, there was no feedback from the game regarding this academic content for students to be able to selfcorrect or self-regulate their actions within the game. For instance, if a player did not survive, the game could notexplain why this happened. These were the strengths and the shortcomings of Minecraft from the perspective ofteaching English, which the instructor could leverage and address respectively by designing learning activities inconjunction with the game.With this knowledge of the game, Max designed a lesson for students to understand how a character’sactions affect a narrative using Minecraft as the curricular anchor creating opportunities for play, curricularactivity reflection and discussion (Foster & Shah, 2015b). While the play would be naturalistic, Max had plannedto identify teachable moments observing how students guided their characters in the world and made decisionsfor the character. During the curricular activities Max wanted to students make connections between the gameand academic content. In one of the curricular activities he would engage students in reading different samplestories, identifying at least five examples of cause and effect, and recording them on t-chart graphic organizers.During reflection and discussion activities, Max wanted students to gain additional insights on cause and effectby prompting them to explore how they in their own lives or characters in stories could make different choices inspecific situations, leading to different outcomes. Max planned to record insights gained from the P-Ca-R-Dactivities using Minecraft (a) to assess students understanding of cause and effect, and the ways it can affect anarrative, and (b) to plan future PCaRD sessions that focus on strengthening students narrative writing skills.Looking aheadStudents’ lives and the ways they learn in and out of school are being transformed in a Deweyan sense bytechnology-mediated experiences. Specifically, learners across sites have more opportunities to engage in inquiry(through tinkering, playing, experimentation), construction (through designing, creating, making, building,producing), communication (through mentoring, collaborating with peers, sharing within a community/affinitybased groups) and expression (of interest, affect, valuing through artefacts created) (Foster & Shah, 2015a; Shah& Foster, 2014a). This paper argues that working with teachers is imperative to democratize learning with gamesand other technological pedagogical innovations (e.g. making) in K-12 education. Research on creativity ineducational technology offers a useful lens for supporting teachers to unpack novel, effective, and wholesome(Henriksen, Mishra & Mehta, 2015) ways to use games and design experiences. Doing so in conjunction withmethodological framework like Game Network Analysis (Foster, Shah & Duvall, 2015; Shah & Foster, 2015) isa step in the direction of empowering teachers (a) to facilitate students’ understanding of concepts, to supportidentities and dispositions, and to trigger future trajectories in academic domains and careers, (b) to complementICLS 2018 Proceedings1870© ISLSgame-based learning with other theoretical and pedagogical approaches that can be instrumental in supportingknowledge and skills in domains and disciplines that are valued in schools, and (c) to foster interactions betweenself and learning and the resulting changes in learners’ interest and valuing of the content encountered throughgame playing (Foster & Shah, 2017; Shah & Foster, 2018).ReferencesBell, A., & Gresalfi, M. S. (2017). Teaching with videogames: How experience impacts classroom integration.Technology, Knowledge and Learning, 22(3), 1–14Chee, Y. S., Mehrotra, S., & Ong, J. C. (2015). Professional development for scaling pedagogical innovation inthe context of game-based learning: teacher identity as cornerstone in “shifting” practice. Asia-pacificJournal of Teacher Education, 43(5), 423-437.Cuban, L. (1986). Teachers and Machines: The classroom use of technology since 1920. New York: TeachersCollege Press.Eastwood, J. L., & Sadler, T. D. (2013). Teachers' implementation of a game-based biotechnology curriculum.Computers & Education, 66(0), 11-24.Foster, A (2008). Games and motivation to learn science: Personal identity, applicability, relevance andmeaningfulness. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 19, 597-614.Foster, A. (2012). Assessing learning games for school content: Framework and methodology. In D. Ifenthaler,D. Eseryel & X. Ge (Eds.), Assessment in Game-based Learning: Foundations, Innovations, andPerspectives. New York: Springer.Foster, A. & Shah, M. (2017). Games, Science, and Identity Change: Findings From A Year-Long TeacherProfessional Development. In M. Pivec & J. Gründler (Eds.), Proceedings of the 11th EuropeanConference on Game-Based Learning (pp. 173-180), Graz, AustriaFoster, A. & Shah, M. (2015a). The ICCE framework: Framing learning experiences afforded by games. Journalof Educational Computing Research, 51(4), 369-395.Foster, A. & Shah, M. (2015b). The play curricular activity reflection and discussion model for game-basedlearning. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 47(2), 71-88.Foster, A., Shah M., & Duvall, M. (2015). Game Network Analysis: A framework for teaching with games. InM.L. Niess &H. Gillow-Wiles (Eds.) Handbook of Research on Teacher Education in the DigitalAge (pp. 380-411). Hershey,PA: Information Science Reference.Henriksen, D., Mishra, P., & Mehta, R. (2015). Novel, Effective, Whole: Towards a NEW framework forevaluations of creative products. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 23(3), 455-478Molin, G. (2017). The Role of the Teacher in Game-Based Learning: A Review and Outlook. In M. Ma & A.Oikonomou (Eds.). Serious Games and Edutainment Applications Vol II (649-674). SpringerInternational PublishingShaffer, D. W., Squire, K., Halverson, R., & Gee, J. P. (2005). Video games and the future of learning. Phi DeltaKappan, 87(2), 104-111.Shaffer, D. W., Nash, P. & Ruis, A. R. (2015). Technology and the New Professionalization of Teaching. TeachersCollege Record (pp. 1-30).Shah, M. (2015). Pre-service Teacher Education in Game-Based Learning: Cultivating Knowledge and Skills forIntegrating Digital Games in K-12 Classrooms. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, Drexel University,Philadelphia, PA.Shah, M. & Foster, A. (2014a). The inquiry, communication, construction and expression (ICCE) framework forunderstanding learning experiences in games. Special Issue on Applied Research in ImmersiveEnvironments for Learning. International Journal of Virtual and Personal Learning Environments, 5(2),1-14.Shah, M. & Foster, A. (2014b). Undertaking an ecological approach to advance game-based learning: A casestudy. Specialissue on game-based learning for 21st century transferable skills: Challenges andopportunities. Journal of Educational Technology and Society, 17(1), 29-41Shah, M. & Foster, A. (2015). Developing and assessing teachers’ knowledge of game-based learning. Journal ofTechnology and Teacher Education, 23(2), 241-267. Chesapeake, VA: Society for InformationTechnology & Teacher Education.Shah, M. & Foster, A. (2018). Promoting Teachers’ Identity Exploration: The Way Forward in Teacher Educationfor Game-Based Learning. In E. Langran & J. Borup (Eds.), Proceedings of Society for InformationTechnology & TeacherEducation International Conference (pp. 478-486). Washington, D.C.,United States: Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education (AACE).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1871© ISLSSilseth, K. (2012). The multivoicedness of game play: Exploring the unfolding of a student’s learning trajectoryin a gaming context at school. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning,7(1), 63-84.Squire, K. D. (2010). From information to experience: Place-based augmented reality games as a model forlearning in a globally networked society. Teachers College Record, 112(10), 2565-2602Takeuchi, L. M, & Vaala, S. (2014). Level up learning: A national survey on teaching with digital games. NewYork: The Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1872© ISLS