Beyond Pedagogical Challenges: Addressing the Social Aspectsaround the Use of Digital Resources in University EducationChiara Rossitto, Stockholm University, chiara@dsv.su.sePatrik Hernwall, Stockholm University, hernwall@dsv.su.seJonas Collin, Stockholm University, jcoll@dsv.su.seAbstract: This article presents the results of a qualitative study in which the challenges ofadopting and adapting digital media to the context of higher education were investigated. Aworkshop attended by university teachers and professional producers of educational videomaterial was organized. The analysis draws attention to issues concerning the quality of digitalmedia, the development of the professional skills required to produce and use them, and theorchestration of learning activities centered on such learning resources. The paper argues thatunderstanding the challenges around the appropriation of digital media in educational settingsencompasses the social and contextual aspects of the settings in which technology is to beused, and not merely the pedagogical concerns underlying its usage.Keywords: Qualitative studies, digital resources, teaching-learning practicesIntroductionThis paper draws attention to the challenges inherent in the adoption and appropriation of digital resources inhigher educational settings. Whereas previous research within the fields of Computer-Supported andTechnology-Enhanced learning has mostly focused on the pedagogical aspects of educational technologies(Zhao & Frank, 2003; Selwyn 2007), this paper discusses the social and contextual aspects related to theiradoption and use. We argue that a focus on the social aspects, and on the teachers personal experience of usingdigital resources and technology is relevant to CSCL research as it fleshes out the conditions that can becomethe material barriers hindering their actual appropriation into teaching practices.Technological development has contributed to the emergence of an information society, whereeconomical and cultural aspects are intrinsically changed by the permeation of ICT (Castells, 1996). Educationis certainly not an exception to this global trend. Interactive technologies have, in fact, become central actors incontemporary educational practices, and in the current discourse on how national educational systems can beimproved by the introduction of digital technologies and platforms. This is also reflected in the large body ofresearch focusing on: i) how technological innovation is reframing our understanding of what technologymediated educational practices entail (i.e. Dillenbourg et al., 2009; Goodyear & Retails, 2010); ii) the set ofmethods that can be adopted to teach and learn with technology; iii) the set of skills required to be a learner inmodern societies (Oppenheimer, 2007; Kay & Greenhill 2011; Robinson 2011). For instance, a currentdiscourse in the Learning Sciences explores the potential of Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) as havingthe potential to profoundly transform education, and to provide a solution to the economical problemscontemporary educational systems are faced with (Pappano, 2012; Friedman 2013). This rhetoric and researchinclination are common to most Western countries, including the one in which the study presented was carriedout. An initial motivation to carry out this study was, in fact, determined by an intention to critically discuss therecent institutional demand to undergo a digitization process of the courses available at our department, and toadapt our teaching practices to the production and introduction of digital resources (i.e. video material). Thispractical intention has, in turn, been instrumental to the more general aim to problematize the abstract optimismin the effectiveness and potential of technology (i.e. Cuban 1986; Oppenheimer, 2007; Nouri et al., 2014), andto critically consider the causes for their poor integration into teaching practices (Buckinghamn & Willett, 2006;Coiro et al., 2008; Snyder et al., 2010).The pervasiveness of the technological infrastructure in contemporary societies contributes to makingdigital educational recourses (i.e. MOOCs lectures, but also OpenCourseware, YouTube videos, TED Talks,Podcasts, Wikipedia), a free commodity ready to be used in the context of higher education. However, as noted(Fischer, 2014, Eisenberg & Fischer, 2014), the hype around the use of such media lacks a serious pedagogicalgrounding (Vardi 2012), and is often based on a too narrow focus on the mere individual learning activitiesfavored by this type of education.This paper seeks to extend this argument. While the aforementioned aspects are indeed essential, weargue that a critical understanding of the use and introduction of digital resources into the context ofconsolidated teaching-learning activities should also entail other issues – for instance, teachers’ expectations,CSCL 2015 Proceedings118© ISLSpossible challenges and advantages they might experience, their opinions on how using digital resources mightimpact their role as a teacher, or the expertise required to be a competent one. Although such aspects are moredirectly connected to the felt-like experience of using technology (McCarthy et al., 2004), rather than toeffective learning outcomes, they are central, as they contribute to a more complete understanding of howinteractive technologies are appropriated (Engeström et al., 1999; Dourish, 2003) in pre-existing practices, andwhat hindrances can emerge when they are introduced into a specific setting. As noted elsewhere (Selwyn,2010), studies of educational technologies are often merely focused on the educational potential technologiescould play in the context of novel teaching approaches (i.e. flipped classrooms, inquiry-based learning, peer-topeer learning, etc.), and how they should be used in such settings. Furthermore, these investigations are oftencarried out at the level of the individual teacher and learner, while overlooking organizational aspects inherent ineducational institutions, or issues connected to personal, social, political or economic values of the context inwhich they are to be used (Zhao & Frank, 2003; Selwyn 2007). Against this background, this work discusses thechallenges entailed in the adoption of digital technology in a university setting. Rather than merely focusing onthe pedagogical aspects, this paper highlights the entanglement of the various challenges that variousstakeholders experience with respect to the use of digital resources in higher education. More specifically, wedraw on the personal experience of teachers, researchers in the field of Technology-Enhanced and ComputerSupported Learning, professional producers of educational video material, and of university staff coveringmanagerial positions. The research presented is instrumental to a discussion on the implications that the broadavailability of digital resources has for higher education against the backdrop of a global scenario in whichuniversities are expected to quickly adjust the development of the “learning society” and ICT use (Bridges et al.,2007).The empirical data stems from a one-day workshop conducted in October 2013. The goal of theworkshop was to unpack and discuss the main limitations and advantages, hindrances and possibilities of usingdigital media (particularly video material) in the context of university courses, both campus- and online-based.The data analysis draws attention to the challenges related to: i) assessing the quality of the digital resourcesavailable online; ii) acquiring the skills needed to create and edit such resources, and iii) the concern toorchestrate meaningful and engaging learning activities around their use. In concluding this article, we relate ourfindings to three points, namely: i) the attempt to modernize pedagogy and teaching practices in an educationalcontext that still privileges and reproduces traditional teaching modalities (i.e. teacher-centered lectures); ii) theexpectations that teachers should also be producers of digital contents; iii) a reconsideration of the role ofuniversity from producers to providers of knowledge. These issues relate to the social character of the universitydepartment studied, which is regarded as a work context reflecting specific assumptions on the socialorganization of the teaching practices supported by technology.MethodologyThe data discussed stem from a workshop organized and held at the department the authors of this paper areaffiliated with. A total of twenty people volunteered to participate in the workshop. All participants worked inthe field of higher education, although in different roles including researchers, teachers and departmentmanagers. Five of the participants were professional producers of educational video material who worked forSweden Educational Radio (Utbildningsradio AB), a public television broadcasting company operating at anational level. All workshop participants had previous experience with the use of digital technology to supportteaching or learning practices. The workshop lasted for 3 hours and was conducted in the fall 2013.The goal of the workshop was to collect examples regarding the use of digital resources in currentteaching practices, as well as to unpack the main benefits and problems the different participants hadexperienced while concretely using the digital media and the interactive technologies discussed. The scope ofthis workshop was in line with the tradition of informing the design and development of interactive technologiesby drawing on an understanding of the actual context in which such technologies are to be deployed (Huges,Randall & Shapiro, 1992; Randall, Harper & Rouncefield, 2007). The study was, therefore, instrumental to theultimate objective to explore possible improvements to an educational system currently required bygovernmental policies to undergo a number of changes also with respect to technology use (David Bridges et al.,2014). Our specific focus was to investigate how digital media, especially video material, can be a resource inthe development of pedagogical quality in teaching and education.The workshop entailed two phases. During the first two hours, the participants were divided into twoseparate groups; the discussion was then facilitated by the first two authors, each one responsible for one of thegroups. This round of discussion revolved around the following themes: i) how current digital media can be aresource, or a hindrance in current teaching practices; ii) the participants’ expectations about education,students, colleagues, and the use of digital media, particularly video; iii) the participants’ needs and concerns inCSCL 2015 Proceedings119© ISLSenvisioning possible future use of digital resources. During the last hour of the workshop, the two groupsgathered again for a common round of discussion, and to compare and exchange opinions about the main topicspreviously emerged. The entire workshop was video-recorded and documented by means of note-taking. All theconversational data were transcribed, and thematic analysis (Bryman, 2012) was used for the analysis. Thematicanalysis is a qualitative method based on the search for themes that become prominent in the description of acertain phenomenon, or of the way people talk about it. Themes are usually identified through a recursivereading of the data collected. As themes are specified, (re)defined and grouped together, they become emergingcategories of analysis.In our case, going through the transcribed material for a first round of analysis allowed us to identify anumber of themes regarding the participants’ overall experience of using ICT in their teaching practices. Duringthis phase, we fleshed out themes addressing various challenges related to the use of educational platforms, suchas: respecting copyright and availability issues when providing access to digital materials, the teachers’ concernto continuously develop their personal skills, and their concern to be able to share with other colleagues bothbest practices and recurrent problems. During a second, more in-depth analysis, we sought to triangulate the datacollected within the two discussion groups in order to identify possible contradictory or overlapping issues.During this phase, we focused more explicitly on the teachers’ perception of the skills that are required toproduce digital resources, particularly video material, the learning activities that can be implemented around theuse of such resources, and the problems related to assessing their quality.As we will illustrate in the following sections, these themes are not solely pedagogical in nature. Infact, the pedagogical character is intertwined with, and inseparable from, a number of social and contextualaspects of the setting studied (i.e. providing teachers with the resources needed to develop their own digitalliteracy). Furthermore it is interwoven with the teachers’ personal experience of using digital technology andmedia (i.e. strategies for assessing the quality of digital resources) at the very specific workplace where theteaching practices discussed were situated and enacted.FindingsAll the workshop participants involved in teaching had a positive inclination towards the adoption and use ofdigital media (i.e. YouTube videos, video lectures created and given at other universities, scientific articles andbooks, training simulations, etc.) in their teaching practices, both including on-campus teaching and distanceeducation. Because of the inter-disciplinary nature of the department in which the study was carried out and,therefore, of the different backgrounds of the teachers present, a variety of courses was discussed during theworkshop. They included topics such as Human-Computer Interaction, Digital Prototyping, Programming,Social and Behavioral Sciences, Project Management, Health informatics, etc. Despite almost all participantshad encountered problems when using digital resources (i.e. assessing the quality of digital materials, having theright skills to create and produce them, making sure they are accessible over a period of time, etc.), there was ashared consensus that they should be further deployed in the context of higher education; this was regardless ofthe subject area being thought.As the workshop discussion highlighted, a broad variety of digital resources is currently availableonline and used for different purposes. For instance, video material available on Youtube is sometimes used asinspirational material to prepare a lecture, or to provide students with additional resources to learn about acertain topic. One of the teachers mentioned, for instance, the possibility to access and use original sources, suchas Skinner’s lecture on behaviorism; another one referred, instead, to the use of a set of instructional videos thathad been created at the department to give students practical guidance to manage the process of writing bachelortheses. As it was discussed, accessing this large body of digital contents does not constitute a serious problem,either for the teachers or the students. The various challenges the teachers pointed out were, instead, related tothe actual use of such resources – for instance, being able to actually develop and create digital materials, how todesign meaningful teaching-learning activities around them, as well as more societal questions on how theirusage could possibly redefine the role of university at large.The following analysis has been organized around three themes that further specify these mainchallenges, namely: assessing the quality of digital resources, developing the new set of skills needed to producethem, and orchestrating learning activities around their use.Assessing the quality of digital resourcesOne of the challenges emerged during the analysis concerns the quality of digital resources. The nexus of thispoint is that the large availability and accessibility of digital media makes it challenging to search for and selectthe ones that are considered as suitable to a specific topic. As a number of participants pointed out, it can beproblematic to assess the quality of a resource such as a video, or a short clip. This aspect of selectingCSCL 2015 Proceedings120© ISLSeducational resources was experienced as considerably more straightforward with more traditional publishedmedia, such as books or scientific articles. This was especially true when such references are key readingswithin a certain scientific area, or have been written by authors who are central within a certain field. Thus, asknowledge becomes a commodity scattered across the main information infrastructure that is the Internet, itbecomes time consuming to look for it, and challenging to assess how suitable it is for certain educationalpurposes, unless it is thoroughly scrutinized and assessed.Another problematic aspect related to the quality of digital resources concerns the possibility to adaptthe contents to different knowledge and expertise levels, especially when such resources have been created forvery specific educational purposes and subject-areas. For instance, one of the participants, who had a longteaching experience in the field of health informatics, considered simulation software for training medicinestudents inflexible. As it was explained, such systems have been developed in order to convey specific set ofcontents and to develop specific skills, which can make it problematic to adapt them to the context of a specificcourse. This, in turn, constitutes a serious hindrance if such resources do not completely match a teacher’sperspective on a certain topic, or if their quality is not entirely suitable for the level of a course. This challengewas discussed by both groups of participants, also with respect to different type of courses. For instance, ateacher working with an online course on Project Management explained that while planning one of his courses,he had found a large body of YouTube videos providing good guidelines on managing projects. Nevertheless,the contents entailed so much more than what they wanted the students to work with that, eventually, they had tocreate their own instructional video material which was eventually distributed to the students on YouTube.This issue of quality was also a practical concern for the professionals working at the broadcastingcompany, who usually seek to account for the quality of the material they produce by explicitly presenting thereasons for choosing certain speakers, and how representative they are of a certain topic.Acquiring and developing a new set of skillsA second main concern emerging from the workshop discussion relates to the novel set of skills that theparticipants, especially the teachers, felt were required in order to self-produce educational digital resources. Infact, differently from the more traditional situation of choosing printed literature for a course, most of theparticipants perceived as an organizational demand the fact that they would have to become more directlyinvolved in the actual creation of digital resources, particularly video material. As several of them emphasized,being able to produce digital materials requires the development and acquisition of an expertise, which theparticipants felt they were not trained for.The discussion around such a competence embodies two main issues that were tackled during theworkshop. On the one hand, this competence entails the technical expertise of being able to create and editdigital materials. As one of the participants complained, this expertise is seldom used, and most of the oncampus lectures currently video-recorded are just uploaded to the university video-player platform withoutfurther editing. Moreover, in most cases, they reflect the interaction modalities of a “traditional” lecture inwhich the teacher plays the central active role of creating contents and delivering them. On the other hand, thisdiscussion connects to other concerns, such as the need to re-think pedagogical approaches (see the followingsection), and to support teachers in the development of narrative skills that are more suitable for video-mediatedlectures rather than face-to-face ones. As one of the participants put it:“One of the concerns I have is that I think I should change my way to prepare a lecture whenI’m thinking to include a video. [the thing] is that I have to tell a story to the students, not onlyto go through the contents as I used to. And the structure is a bit different. Including a videothen I have to try to be consistent with the video and transform the lecture into telling them astory”. (Livia).As the quote indicates, including a video into certain teaching practices requires a different structure and a typeof narrative that is more suitable to the way a video-mediated story is told. As this participant further explained,acquiring these skills encompasses a transition phase needed in order to change practices. This point raised anintense discussion during the workshop, as personal concerns relating to pedagogical approaches andprofessional expertise became intertwined with the organizational concern of managing resources at thedepartment. For instance, the participant who also worked in a managerial position explained that there is noeconomical possibility to allocate the resources (i.e. time) teachers would need to acquire the skills required tobecome different types of storytellers. This types of competences constitutes instead a job for a differentprofessional role altogether. As he put it:CSCL 2015 Proceedings121© ISLS“I can stand in front of a camera and talk and probably say something reasonable, but I couldnever produce it, I could never edit it, [I could never] work with the sound cause I don’t knowhow to do it. This is a job for a person each” (Jamie).Orchestrating learning activities centered on the use of digital materialsThe discussion around the quality and relevance of video material was interwoven with a reflection on theteaching-learning activities that can be designed around the use of digital resources. As most of the participantsemphasized, considering the use of digital resources for teaching entails also a reflection on the active role thatteachers play in providing a context and a structure for those resources. This point was extensively discussed,probably because the presence of both the teachers and the professional content producers contributed to adialogue where two different points of view complemeted each other. This central concern to focus on teachingactivities mediated by the use of digital resources evolved alongside two main issues.On the one hand, the participants drew attention to aspects of students’ motivation, and to someresearch studies arguing that the current organization of university courses is a source of a very low motivationlevel for students (Jim Eales et al., 2002; Schoor & Bannert 2011). As one of the participants strongly believed,a way to overcome motivational problems would be to invest in the production of digital resources, and then touse them in the context of well-structured courses and assignments providing the students with a clear andexplicit idea of what is expected from them. As he put it:“Teachers’ competence is about giving a structure, to create order in this media storm”(Jamie).This point also sparked an intense discussion on more societal issues, such as the future of higher education. Theavailability and permeation of digital media in the context of higher education (the “media storm” mentioned inthe quote above) is changing the vision and the expectations on the role of university in contemporary westernsocieties. Since a growing number of content providers and universities are extensively investing in MOOCs, itis plausible that the teachers’ role in the future could be limited to being examiners, and to making sure thatcertain learning goals have been achieved. This is of course a controversial argument one could either agree ordisagree with. Nevertheless, it is interesting to note that it resonates with the body of technology-centeredliterature characterizing the current discourse on MOOCs and the positive expectations they are invested with(see Vardi, 2012; Fischer, 2014 for a critical view on this point).On the other hand, the discussion on using digital resources in the context of teaching practices evolvedaround the pedagogical approaches that were considered more adequate. One suggestion was, for instance, tomore extensively adopt flipped classrooms approaches in order to be able to actually discuss the contentsdelivered and shared. Educational psychologists like Bruner (1996) have contended the importance to presentlearners with contradictions in order to stimulate critical thinking and reflection. Likewise, during the workshopit was emphasized that one of the most interesting aspects of teaching is to be able to establish a discussionaround the learning material used. Finding good questions triggering relevant discussions was considered centralto reflect on the different perspectives that might exist around a certain topic, even when they are not completelyin accordance with a teacher’s opinion.This discussion also raised a number of other concerns more related to the department seen as acomplex and social workplace. When discussing the actual use of digital media, such issues become entangledwith the pedagogical challenges inherent in orchestrating learning activities based on the digital resources inquestion. One such concern was, for instance, managing teaching resources in the context of large courses. As itwas noted, the flipped classrooms approach is based on the idea of discussing and using (pre)acquiredknowledge in a classroom context under the tuition of a more expert teacher; as such, this approach is alreadyunderlying a number of classroom activities (i.e. seminars) in which students are first required to read, and thento play an active role in engaging with knowledge and working with it. As experience shows, this is more easilyachieved in small courses, rather than the ones attended by three-hundred students, a case which is quitecommon at the department were the study presented was carried out.DiscussionThe goal of the study presented was to unpack the challenges that teachers and other professionals involved inthe field of university education experience as connected to the adoption and use of digital resources. Thethemes chosen have drawn attention to the teachers’ concerns regarding: i) the quality of digital media, and howto assess it; ii) the importance to acquire and develop narrative skills that differ from the ones needed to prepareand deliver traditional face-to-face lectures; iii) the lack of economical resources to be devoted to this type ofCSCL 2015 Proceedings122© ISLStraining; iv) how the extensive availability of digital resources, created by heterogeneous content providers, iseventually connected to the societal role of universities, from creating knowledge to merely delivering it.Considered together, these themes reflect a number of pedagogical issues emerging from the use of digitalresources, but also the individual, the social and organizational concerns (i.e. allocation of economicalresources) that can become material barriers to the introduction of digital technologies. These aspects, we argue,come to the fore when the broader social setting in which digital resources and technologies are to be used isaccounted for (Barkhuus and Lecusay R., 2012; Huge, Randall & Shapiro, 1992; Selwyn, 2007 and 2010). Inwhat follows we further elaborate on the findings presented while discussing them with respect to the currentdiscourse on the use of digital resources in higher education.Firstly, the analysis reveals a tension between a concern to change and “modernize” current pedagogy,and the consolidated organizational practices that are reproduced in the way education is managed at adepartment level, and instantiated in the single courses. Scholars have noted (Dillenbourg, 2009; Andersen &Ponti, 2014; Fischer, 2014) that research in the Learning Science and technology-mediated learning haveemphasized the importance: i) of self-directed learning, peer-to-peer learning, flipped classroom approaches,etc; ii) and to explore how these novel pedagogical approaches can capitalize on the use of interactive anddigital technologies. Nevertheless, academic teaching is still based on the traditional idea of teacher-basedteaching (Fischer, 2014), and this was also reflected on the expectations that many workshop participants hadwith respect to the integration of digital media into their teaching practices. In other words, this seems to be anattempt to change pedagogy, and teaching-learning activities in an organizational framework that reproducesand encourages traditional classroom lectures. Administrative and teaching routines, as well as supportstructures (allocation of time and other resources) are, in fact, based on the assumption that a single teacher isresponsible for managing a course, giving lectures, and designing examination modalities. During the workshop,for instance, one of the employees from the broadcasting company – and therefore somebody external to thedepartment context – pointed out the absence of any internal collaboration between teachers to share bestpractices and examples of using digital media at the department.Secondly, the workshop revealed an implicit expectation that teachers should also be producers ofdigital contents and materials. Certainly, one could argue that teachers are always producing new teachingmaterial (i.e. lectures, course compendia, exercises, tutorials, etc.). Nevertheless, in this case there seemed to bea shared assumption that whether a book can just be used, a digital resource must be created anew or edited inorder to be used effectively within a certain course. One reason explaining this could be that for some teachers itis important to feel empowered and competent by producing their own material (i.e. lectures), rather than usingwhat is already available (i.e. a video lecture). However, we argue that on a more general level this reflectsaspects of how people enact and reproduce social and cultural phenomena by means of technology, particularlythe values and meanings that can emerge when people use certain interactive artifacts (Friedman, 1997). In thecase addressed, this entails various expertise and competences that the teachers thought they should have. As wehave seen in the analysis, this includes the pedagogical and technical skills needed to be able to createmeaningful digital materials and to edit them. Ultimately, we argue, this reflects on the perception of whatconstitutes a central expertise to be a skilled teacher.Finally, a related issue stemming from the analysis concerns a reconsideration of the role ofuniversities in western societies, more focused on delivering and communicating knowledge rather thanproducing it. Technologies are never neutral, and they profoundly modify the activities and the context in whichthey are used (Haas 1996; Engeström, 1999). On an obvious level, this becomes materialized, for instance, asthe social impact of technology effecting both the individual and the collaborative practices enacted in a certainsetting (i.e. the way a certain activity unfolds). However, these changes become also manifest at the level of thepolitical and societal expectations and beliefs concerning the transition that is foreseen and promoted for highereducation. Phenomena like MOOCs, and the debate connected to the extensive availability of digital resourcescan all be framed in the broader context of globalization, knowledge economy (Smith, 2007; David Bridges etal. 2007), and of how economical and cultural aspects of society are redefined by the pervasiveness of ICT(Castells, 1996). All these aspects become entangled in the discussion on how interactive technology and digitalmedia can and should be used in higher education. This, in turn, contributes to the emergence of newpossibilities for the production and circulation of knowledge where, as noted (Etzkowitz & Viale, 2010), theuniversity transition into the 21st century is driven by a concern to make knowledge available across variouscontexts.Conclusions and implicationsIn this paper we have introduced the findings stemming from a one-day workshop that was organized in order todiscuss the use of digital media in higher education, and how they can be experienced either as hindrance or asCSCL 2015 Proceedings123© ISLSan opportunity for current teaching-learning activities. A total of twenty people participated in the workshop,and they included teachers, researchers in the field of Technology-Enhanced Learning, professional producers ofvideo material for educational purposes, as well as department staff in managerial positions.The data analysis has illustrated the pedagogical aspects entailed in orchestrating engaging learningactivities centered on the use of digital resources. Furthermore, it has shed light on the social and materialaspects connected to the use of digital resources in a university context. More specifically, the teachers’experience of how the adoption of such resources relates to the expertise required to use such resources and,thus, the redefinition of what it means to be a competent teacher.The analysis presented is relevant as it is instrumental to a more general discussion on the implicationsthat the extensive availability of digital resources, and the transformation of knowledge into a commodity hasfor higher education. With this regard, we have tackled three main issue, namely: i) the attempt to modernizepedagogy and teaching practices in an educational context that still privileges and reproduces traditionalteaching modalities (i.e. teacher-centered lectures); ii) the expectations that teachers should also be producers ofdigital contents; iii) a reconsideration of the role of university from producers to providers of knowledge.ReferencesAndersen R., Ponti M. (2014). Participatory pedagogy in an open educational course: challenges andopportunities. In the Distance Education Journal, Routledge: Taylor and Francis Group, pp. 234-249.Buckingham, D., & Willett, R. (2006). Digital generations: Children, Young People, and New Media. Mahwah,NJ, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Barkhuus L., Lecusay R. (2012). Social Infrastructures as Barriers and Foundation for Informal Learning:Technology Integration in an Urban After-School Center. In JCSCW, the Journal of CollaborativeComputing and Work Practices. V. 21, N° 1. Springer-Verlag: The Netherlands, pp.81-103.Bruner J. (1996). The Culture of Education. Cambridge, MA: Harward University Press.Bridges D., Juceviciene P., Jucevicius, R., Mclaughlin T. H., & Stankeviciute J. (2007). Higher education andnational development: Universities and societies in transition. London: Routledge.Bryman A. (2012). Social Research Methods. Oxford University Press.Castells, M. (1996). The rise of the network society. Vol. 1 of The information age: Economy, society andculture. Massachusetts and Oxford: Blackwell.Coiro, J., Knobel, M., Lankshear, C. and Leu, D. (eds). (2008). The Handbook of Research on New Literacies.Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Cuban L., (1986). Teachers and Machines: the Classroom Use of Technology since 1920. New York: TeachersCollege Press.Dillenbourg P., Järvelä S., Fischer F., (2009). The Evolution of Research in Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning. Zeitschrift für Berufs- und Wirtschaftsdedagogik, 21. Pp 11-130.Dourish P. (2003). "The Appropriation of Interactive Technologies: Some Lessons from Placeless Documents."Computer Supported Cooperative Work: The Journal of Collaborative Computing 12. Springer-Verlag,pp. 465-490.Engeström Y. (1999). Activity theory and individual and social transformation. In Perspectives on ActivityTheory, edited by Engeström Y., Miettinen R., Punamäki R. (Eds.). Cambridge, UK: CambridgeUniversity Press. pp. 19-38.Goodyear P., Retails S. (2010). Technology-Enhanced Learning. Design Patterns and Pattern Languages. SensePublishers: Rotterdam, Boston, Taipei.Eisenberg, M. & Fischer, G. (2014) "MOOCs: A Perspective from the Learning Sciences". In J. L. Polman et al.(Eds.), Learning and Becoming in Practice: 11th International Conference of the Learning Sciences(ICLS) 2014, Boulder, pp. 190-197.Etzkowitz H., Viale R. (2010). Polyvalent Knowledge and the Entrepreneurial University: a Thirds AcademicRevolution? In Critical Sociology 36(4). Sage, pp. 595-609.Fischer, G. (2014) "Beyond Hype and Underestimation: Identifying Research Challenges for the Future ofMOOCs," Commentary for the Special Issue “Massively Open Online Courses (MOOCs)” of theDistance Education Journal, Routledge: Taylor and Francis Group, pp. 149-158.Friedman B. (1997). Human Values and the Design of Computer Technology. Cambridge University Press.Friedman, T. L. (2014, October 21). Revolution hits the universities. The New York Times. Retrieved fromhttp://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/27/opinion/sunday/friedman-revolution- hits-the-universities.htmlHaas C. (1996). Writing Technologies: Studies on the Materiality of Literacy. Erlbaum.Hughes J., Randall D. and Shapiro D. (1992). Faltering form Ethnography to Design. In Proceedings of CSCW’92 Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work. The ACM: New York, pp. 115-122.CSCL 2015 Proceedings124© ISLSJim Eales R.T., Hall T., Bannon L. (2002). In Proceedings of CSCL '02, the Conference on Computer Supportfor Collaborative Learning: Foundations for a CSCL Community. ACM: New York, pp. 310-317.Kay K., Greenhill V., (2011). Twenty-First Century Students Need 21st Century Skills. In Bringing Schools intothe 21st Century. Wan G., Gut D. (Eds). Springer: Dordrecht Heidelberg London New York.Oppenheimer T., (2007). The flickering mind: Saving education from the false promise of technology. NewYork: Random House.McCarthy J., Wright P. (2004). Technology as Experience. Cambridge Massachusetts, London England: TheMIT Press.Nouri J., Cerratto-Pargman T., Rossitto C., Ramberg R. (2014). Learning With or Without Mobile Devices? AComparison of Traditional School Field Trips and Inquiry-Based Learning Activities. In the Journal ofResearch and Practice in Technology-Enhanced Learning, 9(2), pp. 241-262.Pappano, L. (2014, October 21). The year of the MOOC. The New York Times. Retrieved fromhttp://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/04/education/edlife/massive-open-online-courses- are-multiplyingat-a-rapid-pace.htmlRandall, D., Harper R., Rouncefield M., (2007). Fieldwork for Design: Theory and Practice. Springer.Robinson, Ken. (2011). Out of our minds: Learning to be creative: John Wiley & Sons.Selwyn N. (2007) The use of computer technology in university teaching and learning: a critical perspective.Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 23, pp. 83–94.Selwyn N. (2010). Looking beyond learning: notes towards the critical study of educational technology. InJournal of Computer Assisted Learning, 26. Blackwell Publishing Ltd, pp. 65-73.Schoor C., Bannert M., (2011). Motivation in a computer-supported collaborative learning scenario and itsimpact on learning activities and knowledge acquisition. In the Learning and Instructions Journal,21(4). Elsevier, pp.560-573.Snyder, K; Panichi, L; Lindberg, O. (2010). On the issue of quality of experience in technology supportedlearning. Designs for Learning. No, 1-2/ December 2010 pp. 42-51.Smith R. (2007). Conceptions of the universities and the demands of contemporary societies. In Highereducation and national development: Universities and societies in transition. London: Routledge, pp.30-39.Vardi M. Y. (2012). Will MOOCs destroy academia? Communication of the ACM, 55(11). ACM Press: NewYork. p.5.Zhao Y. & Frank K. (2003). Factors affecting technology uses in schools: an ecological perspective. AmericanEducation Research Journal, 40, pp. 807-840.AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank the workshop participants for sharing their experience and opinions with us. Theresearch presented was supported by the Department of Computer and Systems Sciences at StockholmUniversity.CSCL 2015 Proceedings125© ISLS