Maker Portfolios as Learning and Community-Building ToolsInside and Outside MakerspacesAnna Keune, Indiana University, akeune@indiana.eduKylie Peppler, Indiana University, kpeppler@indiana.eduAbstract: Portfolio assessment gains new traction in youth-serving maker-educational spacesthrough increased inclusion of maker portfolios in college and job applications. However, thecollaborative and cooperative character of making poses a tension to traditional portfolioassessment that is focused on showcasing individual achievements. Together, this calls for anexpanded understanding of the use of portfolios in maker education. We examined the types ofportfolio entries at two youth-serving makerspaces (one out-of-school and one in-school), andobserved the documentation of personal and shared projects in personal and shared portfolios.Our main findings are that, compared to portfolios that focused on personal work alone,portfolios that included shared projects and documentation presented richer showcases, showingtechnical and social engagement, assessment by people across a distributed community, andpossibilities to narrate work to multiple audiences. This has implications on the facilitation ofmaker portfolios and broadens portfolio assessment to show the role of the learner in society.Keywords: maker education, portfolio assessment, maker portfoliosIntroductionYouth-serving makerspaces are spaces for learning, in which youth create projects using digital tools and tangiblematerials alongside their peers. Through design, learners become active producers of sharable artifacts (Peppler,2013). By making projects publically available and sharing them within the maker-educational spaces,makerspaces become communities of learning that center around the collaborative construction of that community(Sheridan et al., 2014). This combination of design and sharing practices is in many ways similar to KnowledgeBuilding, which sees learning as a production-centered, collaborative, and interest-driven design process that actsas a catalyst for collaboration and communities (Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, 2009). Aspects of the design processcenter on the use of mediating technologies to document, share, and reflect on contributions toward forming ashared understanding (Hakkarainen, Paavola, Kangas, & Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, 2013).Documenting, sharing, and reflecting on learning in makerspaces is a promise of digital portfolioassessment. Portfolio assessment originated from the historical precedent of arts-based portfolios (Gardner, 1989).As a response to the increased pressures of accountability, portfolios were seen as a hopeful alternative tostandardized testing and a way to provide a richer picture of student learning (Niguidula, 1993; Mills, 1996).Typical portfolio assessment processes tightly couple instructions and assessment to increase ownership overlearning and to position portfolios as learning tools (Lamme & Hysmith, 1991; Love, McKean, & Gathercoal,2004). While traditional portfolio assessment often culminates in one individual student’s personal website,narrative, or collection, as students capture their accomplishments and learning processes online, portfolios canalso become community-building tools, garnering constructive feedback on expressed efforts (Tseng, 2015).Today, maker portfolios are gaining traction as part of job and college applications, promising to expand accessto opportunities beyond the makerspace (Peppler, Maltese, Keune, Chang, & Regalla, 2014). While traditionalportfolio assessments have defined audiences, maker portfolios invite multiple audiences that are unknown at thetime the portfolio was created. The community-oriented approaches of making and the potential multipleaudiences of maker portfolios present tensions to traditional portfolio assessment and suggest that we cannot applythem to maker-education. The expanded role of portfolios as learning tools and community-building tools insideand outside of the maker-educational setting calls for a fundamental shift from valuing cognitive outcomes tovaluing the role of the individual in society. Educators have to design portfolio practices that act as learning andcommunity-building tools inside and outside the makerspace and the new purpose of representing youths’ role insociety is imperative. This leads us to the question: How do portfolio posts differ across youth portfolios and whatkind of posts facilitate portfolios to function as tools for learning community building, and expandingopportunities beyond the makerspace?The experiences which youth document today could dramatically shape the opportunities that they accesstomorrow. Understanding how to successfully capture the richness of engagement in maker-educational settingspromises to broaden opportunities, because not only products and individual achievement but also the role ofcollaboration and community engagement can become visible to people outside the maker-educational space.CSCL 2017 Proceedings545© ISLSMethodsTo study youth maker portfolios, we performed a year long qualitative inquiry in two maker-educational spaceswith continous space-wide portfolio efforts: an out-of-school and a high school makerspace in the eastern UnitedStates. We selected the sites from 10 youth-serving makerspace because both spaces integrated making acrosssubjects and programs and all youth had personal websites for documenting projects, processes and reflectionsThe out-of-school space offered programs to youth from 8 to 18 through summer camps (e.g., 3D printing, digitalfilmmaking), open-ended programs, and foundational courses. All youth had a personal website that linked to ashared page that showed all current projects. At the high-school space, students documented assignments andwork-in-progress on personal websites, and teachers worked with portfolio templates or designed their ownapproaches to facilitate portfolio processes.Our engagement began with conference calls with educators and site administrators to get an overviewof the makerspace portfolio practices and to plan field site visits. During two field site visits to each site, weobserved youth working on portfolios and asked 10 youth to “walk us through” their portfolios, which fusedusability walkthroughs (Rieman, Franzke, & Redmiles, 1995) with semi-structured interviews (Merriam &Tisdell, 2015). Here, youth talked about their projects, learning, and reasons for documenting. We also studiedthe online portfolios of 37 youth (22 from the out-of-school and 15 from the school space), who wererecommended by educators as particularly engaged in portfolios. The portfolios included 569 posts in total.Following Erickson’s (2004) approach to qualitative research, we iteratively looked across entries andidentified themes within the makers’ projects and documentation to help characterize the portfolios in relation totheir function as tools for showcasing individual work as well as presenting the role of the individual in societyinside and outside of the makerspace. The themes we identified were: (1) personal projects paired with personaldocumentation, (2) shared projects paired with personal documentation, (3) personal projects that weredocumented in shared spaces, and (4) shared projects that were documented in shared spaces.Categorizing the portfolio entries and walkthroughs according to these themes, we identified patterns inthe way that social engagement in projects and documentation was represented across portfolios. This highlightedboth frequently reoccurring practices and unique portfolios. An in-depth analysis of theme-related portfoliosidentified how portfolio entries characterized makers’ experiences inside the makerspaces as well as some of theopportunities that portfolios may open up for youth outside the makerspace.FindingsOf the 569 posts reviewed, the majority (81.5%) showed personal projects paired with personaldocumentation. The posts included projects related to 3D printing, game design, and digital image manipulation.When we observed maker activities that were framed as personal projects and captured in personal portfolios, wenoticed that youth nevertheless actively crafted together, pointing at or commenting on each other’s projects andtechniques, while educators facilitated feedback and peer-review activities. The entries acted as learning tools,because youth could revisit them and see their personal progress in technical skills. In addition, the entries servedcommunity because the youths’ technical explanations could act as guides for similar projects. And finally, outsidethe makerspace portfolio entries on finished products could elevate college or job applications.By contrast, shared projects paired with personal documentation did demonstrate social practices.Of all posts, 12.6% were of this type. They included personal reflections on small-group collaborations, such asdescriptions of prototyping new makerspace furniture within small groups. The portfolios with entries thatreferenced social interactions during making also contained entries on finished projects and techniques. Whenyouth augmented the documentation of final projects with evidence of social interactions during making, theportfolio showed teamwork development over time, suggesting how an applicant might fit into a new communityby showing the youth’s role in their community to an outside audience.The out-of-school makerspace curated all individual youths’ portfolios on one website and highlightedthe latest entries by each youth on one page (Figure 1). This was an example of personal projects that weredocumented in shared spaces. Youth described this particular page as a tool for learning and communitybuilding. Seeing the accumulated work served as a springboard for new projects. As a barometer of communityprojects, shared documentation of personal projects could provide visitors with insights into the community andthe types of projects that individuals have access to as result of their makerspace membership.CSCL 2017 Proceedings546© ISLSFigure 1. Personal projects that were documented in shared in the out-of-school makerspace.Shared projects that were documented in shared spaces (e.g., across online platforms) further augmentedportfolios. One example of this was Ted’s high school maker portfolio. Involved with media production courses,Ted captured his motion pictures on YouTube, including music videos, digital animations, and effects (Figure 2,left). His channel had over 7,000 subscribers. At first glance a personal space for documentation, Ted linked hischannel to collaborators and actively called for reviews, which encouraged the building of a community aroundhis work and attracted requests for tutorials on his special effects. In addition, his portfolio included a Soundcloudaccount, co-owned with a friend, which offered audio remixes they created together. It had more than 19.000followers (Figure 2, right).Figure 2. Screenshot of Ted’s YouTube channel (left) and Ted’s shared Soundcloud account (right).Ted’s distributed body of work supported him in building a strong online presence and a communityoutside school that was willing to assess his work. While people inside the community and school setting mightnot require descriptions to understand his work, people outside the community would need such backgroundinformation. When applying to college, Ted curated his work on a website that had expired when we spoke tohim: “For now I’ve already gotten into college. (...) My portfolio is almost word-of-mouth at this point so peoplecan show other people the things that I’ve done.” Ted was not concerned about the “sketchbook” character of hisportfolio, which lacked a unified narrative. The distributed pieces that included shared projects and weredocumented in shared spaces allowed him to establish himself as an accomplished maker who engaged peopleacross communities, and to spin-off narratives when needed.While all portfolios allowed youth to present products and processes to an audience, different types ofportfolio entries painted different pictures of engagement. Individual making paired with individualdocumentation privileged the presentation of final projects and technical processes, which could potentiallypromote a youth’s job or college application. Shared projects captured in personal entries augmented final projectsand techniques with displays of social engagements, which could help employers or college boards imagine howprospective candidates might fit into a workplace or college culture. Personal projects documented in sharedportfolios further expanded portfolios to give insight into the community for external reviews. Even furtheraugmentation occurred in portfolios that included shared projects and shared documentation, which facilitated theengagement with communities outside the makerspace and challenged portfolios as unified narratives. Althougha majority of the posts and portfolios included personal rather than group projects, we found that portfolios thatincluded diverse types of entries led to a strong online presence and community participation. Compared toportfolios that focused on personal work alone, portfolios that included shared projects and documentationpresented richer showcases, showing technical and social engagement, assessment by people across a distributedcommunity, and possibilities to narrate work to multiple audiences.CSCL 2017 Proceedings547© ISLSDiscussion and implicationsFew projects and documentations reviewed in this study captured collaboration, yet group projects and shareddocumentation had a strong visible impact on the community outside the makerspace. Our findings haveimplications for the design of portfolio processes and assessments. They point to the importance of facilitatingcollaboration in creating projects and documentations and encouraging adaptive sketchbook portfolios overunified narratives. However, the fact that portfolios did not show collaboration does not mean youth did notcollaborate. Through shared projects and shared documentation, the youths’ roles inside and outside of themakerspace can be encouraged and made visible, broadening portfolio assessment beyond capturing knowledgeand skills. This pushes our understanding of the role of portfolios as tools for assessment toward evidence of therole youth play in society. Furthermore, adaptive portfolios could be curated more readily into different emergentnarratives, which could broaden opportunities for youth to frame their experiences to unanticipated audiencesafter capturing portfolio entries. Overall, the findings point to the importance of considering collaboration inmaking and documenting when designing portfolio assessments that are intended to serve as learning andcommunity building tools inside and outside the makerspace. Future work should focus on identifying specificfacilitation strategies for collaboration in making and documenting as well as investigating the implications of theonline availability of shared and potentially conflicting accounts of youth creative experiences, for examplethrough the study of youth creative processes within online portals (e.g., the Scratch community).ReferencesGardner, H. (1989). Zero-based arts education: An introduction to ARTS PROPEL. Studies in Art Education, 7183.Erickson, F. (2004). Demystifying data construction and analysis. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 35(4),486-493.Hakkarainen, K., Paavola, S., Kangas, K, & Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P. (2013). Sociocultural Perspectives onCollaborative Learning: Towards Collaborative Knowledge Creation. In C. E. Hmelo-Silver, C. A.Chinn, C. K. K. Chan & A. O’Donnell (Eds.), The International Handbook of Collaborative Learning(57-73). New York: Routledge.Lamme, L. L., & Hysmith, C. (1991). One school's adventure into portfolio assessment. Language Arts, 68(8),629-640.Love, D., McKean, G., & Gathercoal, P. (2004). Portfolios to webfolios and beyond: Levels of maturation.Educause Quarterly, 27(2), 24-38.Merriam, Sharan; & Tisdell, Elizabeth (2015). Qualitative research: A guide to design and implementation. JohnWiley & Sons.Mills, R. P. (1996). Statewide Portfolio Assessment: the Vermont Experience. In Performance-Based StudentAssessment: challenges and possibilities (pp. 192–214). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.Niguidula, D. (1993). The Digital Portfolio: A Richer Picture of Student Performance. Studies on Exhibitions, 13,1-12. Retrieved from http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED400261.pdfPeppler, K. (2013). New Opportunities for Interest-Driven Arts Learning in a Digital Age. Wallace Foundation.Peppler, K., Maltese, A., Keune, A., Chang, S., & Regalla, L. (2014) Survey of makerspaces, part II. OpenPortfolios. Maker Education Initiative.Rieman, John; Franzke, Marita; & Redmiles, David (1995, May). Usability evaluation with the cognitivewalkthrough. Paper presented at the conference Companion on Human Factors in Computing Systems,7-11 May 1995, at Denver, Colorado, USA.Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P. (2009). Craft Design Processes in Virtual Design Studio. Techne Series-Research inSloyd Education and Craft Science A, 14(1), 214-226.Sheridan, K., Halverson, E. R., Litts, B., Brahms, L., Jacobs-Priebe, L., & Owens, T. (2014). Learning in themaking: A comparative case study of three makerspaces. Harvard Educational Review, 84(4), 505-531.doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.17763/haer.84.4.brr34733723j648uTseng, T. (2015). Making make-throughs: Supporting young makers sharing design process. Proc. of Fablearn.AcknowledgmentsThe research was made possible by generous support from the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation and ourcontinuous collaboration with Maker Ed and Stephanie Chang. We also thank the members of our nationaladvisory board and the Creativity Labs at Indiana University for constructive comments and valuable insights, aswell as the adult and youth members of the makerspaces whose willingness to share made this work possible.CSCL 2017 Proceedings548© ISLS