Accessibility, Making and Tactile Robotics:Facilitating Collaborative Learning and Computational Thinking forLearners With Visual ImpairmentsJooYoung Seo, The Pennsylvania State University, jooyoung@psu.eduGabriela T. Richard, The Pennsylvania State University, grichard@psu.eduAbstract: This poster focuses on accessibility concerns that learners with visual impairments(LVIs) face in making environments, particularly with contemporary toolkits. Thisexploratory study was conducted over a three-day summer making workshop with visuallyimpaired high school students to explore some major challenges and potentials of tangiblemaking and robotics platforms, utilizing KIBO as a model. We explored how a tangiblecoding platform (KIBO) and accessible design modifications affected individual andcollaborative group interaction and cognition.IntroductionWith the development of inexpensive maker tools such as the Raspberry Pi and Arduino microcontroller,making and robotics have become more accessible for novices and children than ever before (Halverson &Sheridan, 2014). However, learners with disabilities, in general, have had limited access to the makermovement, along with other opportunities to learn coding and design (Brady, Salas, Nuriddin, Rodgers, &Subramaniam, 2014). Drawing upon our framework for accessible makerspaces (Figure 1), this paper details arobotics-based maker workshop tailored for high school and young adult learners with visual impairments(LVIs). We investigated the following research questions: How do LVIs engage with platforms that are tangiblyaccessible? How does the accessibility of the tools affect learners’ self-efficacy and collaborative interactions?What design elements do LVIs express would be beneficial for equitable co-creation and collaborative learning?MethodsAll data were collected from five of the nine participants (aged 15 through 19) who fully consented. Participantsattended a three-day making workshop (each session between 1-1.5 hours) for high school and young adultlearners with visual impairments in the Northeastern United States. KIBO (Kinder Lab, 2017), a wooden blockbased tangible robotic kit (Figure 2) designed to learn core programming concepts through play, was utilized forworkshop activities both without (Day 1) and with (Day 2 and 3) accessibility modifications. The study utilizedcomparative case study research design (Stake, 2008), with microanalytic video analysis, open-response preand post- questionnaires, in-depth focus group interviews, and think-aloud protocols where learners wouldvocalize their actions. We analyzed each source to understand how accessibility affected both individual andcollaborative group interaction and cognition with the artifacts. Due to limited space, this poster focuses on twoparticipants: Aaron (19-year-old, African American male), who had functional low vision from group A, and Mary(16-year-old, Caucasian female), who was nearly blind, from group B.Figure 1 (left). Framework for Accessible Makerspaces. Figure 2 (right). Kibo Robot (Kinder Lab, 2017).Case studiesOn the first day, a full set of KIBO robotics kits were distributed to each group without any accessibilitymodifications. Aaron often deferred to his completely blind group member, who had some experience coding andconstructing model cars. He primarily participated peripherally or by assisting others, such as when he helped thecompletely blind group member look for a battery and tried to assemble the robot collaboratively at the instructionICLS 2018 Proceedings1755© ISLSof others. In group B, Mary who was nearly blind kept asking a fellow groupmate with a moderate visualimpairment to identify each block. When scanning each block, Mary tended to observe closely or listen to herfellow group member with better visual acuity. Though this better sighted group mater tended to dominate mostactivities, Mary moved from peripherally observing to block finding.On the second day, two accessibility considerations were added to the kits: (1) braille labels for each ofthe function and parameter blocks for additional tactile cues; and (2) an organizing system using three differentplastic containers (i.e., input/sensor; output/actuator; and condition/loop groups). The organizing systemprovided students a logical and tangible structure for finding blocks and parameters. During day 2, with theabsence of more vocal group members, Aaron changed from a peripheral observer to a block scanner. However, hedid not benefit from the braille addition since he did not know braille. During scanning, he tried to employ alternativesensory feedback, such as the auditory cues, from KIBO after each scan. However, he was still sensitive to includingthe completely blind group mate, who would play with the blocks while they discussed them and hit the “play” buttonon KIBO to start the actions they scanned. Despite his efforts, scanning blocks was not a simple enterprise due toKIBO’s inherent scanner inconsistencies. Though Aaron had some visual acuity, the finicky nature of scanning madeit even more difficult to have a mastery experience with the toolkit. Mary missed this session so her experience withthe accessibility modification was captured on the following day.On day 3, we integrated a race competition between groups A and B to encourage the use of differentcomputational concepts and practices. Aaron was the only active participant in group A on the last day while theothers remained uninvolved. He handed the KIBO scanner to one of the other group members who could seebetter than him to scan what he programmed. Their KIBO did not work as intended and Aaron began to debughis code by vocalizing it out loud. Because Aaron and his teammate spent too much time solving the first mission,they had to end their program in the middle of race; however, in contrast to the first day, Aaron was actively engagedin the hands-on activity and attempted to keep solving the problems collectively by allowing other group members tocontribute. In group B, Mary was more actively engaged in the workshop compared to the first day by reading thebraille labels on each block. When the group struggled with their coding for the first mission, she took the lead todebug the program. She tried to scan the blocks even though the scanner did not have an accessibility modification:“May I scan?” she asks as she tries to take the KIBO from the more sighted group member. When the group wasaddressing the final mission, Mary debated with the member with more visual acuity, who had taken on a dominantrole: “You have to put the ‘forward’ before the ‘repeat’…. You're having it repeat the song.” While Mary’s new codewas not technically correct, it is more important to note her changing role within the group over time from aperipheral observer to block-finder and active problem solver.Discussion and conclusionThroughout the activities, we found some expected finings as well as some surprising ones. For example, wefound that visual acuity affected participation. Learners who were completely blind or had lower vision weresometimes limited in their full participation and engagement. Conversely, engaging in hands-on practices alonewere not necessarily evidence of understanding; sometimes a learner took on that role due to their visual acuitywhile a lower vision learner provided content expertise. However, we also found that visual impairments did notspeak to the full range of complexity observed. For example, some lower vision learners were vocal in beingincluded in the collaborative work, whereas, some learners with better visual acuity self-selected to engage inperipheral learning for a variety of other complex reasons, such as Aaron, who had never had the opportunity toengage in comparable activities. Moreover, the addition of braille was helpful for some, but limiting for othersfor similar issues related to prior opportunities. As learners with a range of visual impairments and access toresources, they helped reveal that design for accessibility has to be more reflexive. We recommend that the fieldbe cognizant of including varied material affordances that would be accessible to a wide range of learners withdisabilities, but also consider participatory design practices for a diverse range of learners.ReferencesBrady, T., Salas, C., Nuriddin, A., Rodgers, W., & Subramaniam, M. (2014). MakeAbility: Creating AccessibleMakerspace Events in a Public Library. Public Library Quarterly, 33(4), 330-347.Halverson, E. R., & Sheridan, K. (2014). The maker movement in education. Harvard Ed Rev, 84(4), 495-504.Kinder Lab Robotics. (2017). KIBO. Retrieved from http://www.shop.kinderlabrobotics.com/Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. Basic Books, Inc.Stake, R. E. (2008). Qualitative case studies. In N. K. Denzin 8c Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), Strategies of qualitativeinquiry, 3rd Ed. (pp. 119-150). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Wing, J. M. (2008). Computational Thinking and Thinking about Computing. Philosophical Transactions:Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 366(1881), 3717-3725.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1756© ISLS