Navigating “Disability”: Complexity and Small EnvironmentsJessica H. Hunt, North Carolina State University, jhunt5@ncsu.eduAbstract: Exploring how children’s conceptions might advance through their implicitknowledge provides a fundamental view into children’s mathematics and elucidates possiblealternative definitions of “learning difference (LD)”. I present an evolving theoreticalframework that depict children with LD’s knowing and learning as nascent understandingsthat emerge from a real-time negotiation of meaning within “small environments” ofinstructional intervention. These negotiations are supported, or not, by the teacher’spropensity to engage in the knowledge of children and use teaching to construct shared goalsfor learning. Implications of the work include new ways educators might define LDs as acomplex phenomenon that reflects how children’s knowledge of mathematics advances, ornot, through a shared cognition grounded in children’s unique knowing and learning.Conceptualizing “Difference” in terms of knowing and learning mathematicsThe major issues addressed in this work are conceptualizing “disability” and what it means to “know and learnmathematics” in instructional settings. Historically, researchers define instruction for these students asintervention: the addressing of deficiencies or differences in children’s mathematical knowledge (e.g., Hudson& Miller, 2006). In some research, specific factors (e.g., working memory, processing, spatial reasoning,retrieve basic facts, identifying and/or compare number magnitudes and symbols) are tested alongsideinstruction (or before and after instruction) in a predictive manner to explain “learning disabilities” as a nonresponse to explicit, teacher-led instruction (e.g., Compton, Fuchs, Fuchs, Lambert, & Hamlett, 2012; Jordan,2007; Mazzocco & Devlin, 2008; Murphy, Mazzocco, Hanich, & Early, 2007; Vukovic, 2012).The propensity to equate these children’s knowing and learning as a response to direct or explicitinstruction is probable due to the manner in which disability is being defined or conceptualized. Societal norms,the teacher’s knowledge, or some combination thereof becomes the driving force behind mathematicalknowledge as a remediation (Vygotsky, 1978). Yet, this literature is incomplete and at times misleading forthose who do not equate remediation with learning. I frame learning as adaptation (Piaget, 1951/1972/1980) andargue that because disabilities or differences in learning are far more dissimilar than they are similar (Comptonet al., 2012), instruction should be based in a complex model of children’s knowing and learning that I call“small environments”.Learner complexity in “Small Environments” — mind, goals, and environment“Small environments” ground learning within adaptation as opposed to remediation done through directinstruction or explicit strategy modeling. If we accept that students possess a way of knowing mathematicalcontent (DiSessa, 1988), then we also have to accept that even if students engage with learning situations inunexpected ways, their knowing and reasoning cannot be conceptualized as “deficient” or, arguably, even“different.” It must be conceptualized as their knowledge: unique, complex organisms comprised of strengthsand challenges that every person utilizes to make sense (Rose & Fischer, 2009). I draw from Piaget(1967/1972/1980), who argued that, often times, these ways of making sense are individualized, especiallywhen we consider that the ways children reason are not the same as adults (Flavell, 1996). For Piaget (1972),knowing and learning was defined by the individual child, or “little scientist,” who learned through a complexway of adapting her internal cognition (e.g., prior experience; current conceptions) through interactions with herenvironment that facilitate negotiated meanings.Negotiated meanings take place in the small environment first as children’s attempt to adapt theirinternal cognition with the environment and second as a bi-directional reasoning and sense making processstarted by children and facilitated by the teacher as a responsiveness to children’s reasoning (Brown, 1992;Bruner, 1999; Piaget, 1951, 1972). A focus on the process through which cognition exists and adapts insidechildren’s minds (i.e., schemes) as they negotiate the environment is one way to understand learning. Piaget(1972) argued that, in attempts to assimilate their environments, children notice differences between what they“know” and their environment; this creates disequilibrium. The disequilibrium occurs when the knowledgechildren already have (i.e., how they “see” things) differs from their environment. Children’s reflections withingoal-driven activity caused by the disequilibrium are thought to promote abstractions and generalizations inreasoning. The core element that children draw upon within this reflective activity is the goal that drives theirlearning; this goal can be formed and motivated by various factors (e.g., social, personal, logical, Piaget).Defining learning, or differences in learning, in this way is provoking because it illuminates an inferred build-upICLS 2018 Proceedings1469© ISLSof learning (i.e., such that learning becomes new knowledge) on the part of children as they negotiate their ownminds (e.g., Boyce & Norton, 2017; Hunt, Tzur, & Westenskow, 2016; Simon, 2017; Steffe & Olive, 2010).However, I assert that a sole focus on inferred processes by which children negotiate their own mindsleads to incomplete depictions of learning or, arguably, disabled learning. This is because children’s interactionswith other people in the environment are also defining learning. Children constantly form and refines their goalfor learning in activity, so their interactions with the small environment are already complex. Additionalcomplexity is presented when an adult interacts with the child in the small environment, with her or his own“goals” for learning, which can also have varying motivators (e.g., pacing guides, mathematical content goals,mathematical process goals, depictions of growth from developmental trajectories, etc.). Children’s learning,then, becomes negotiated by more than just their own interactions with the environment: learning becomesnegotiated by the goals of the other person in the environment.In this way, I equate complexity inside the small environment with the real-time negotiation of thegoals these children experience in their own activity with adult’s goals for children’s learning as eitherperceived by the child, explicated by the adult, or set by the learning situation. I argue that within thisnegotiation, assumptions are made about who is setting the goals and what those goals are relying upon.Children and teachers both set goals, and these goals may differ. This is critical because each person’s goals areeffecting the interactions necessary for little scientists to understand and adapt to the small environments.Responding to children’s reasoning as they adapt it in intervention is critical (Empson, 1999) yet by nomeans an easy task. One reason is that children’s prior experiences may not align with the teacher’s theories forlearning. Children may take a different kind of ownership of mathematical thinking (Woodward, 2004),attributing knowing and learning as quick response to teacher-given explanations or procedural steps(Woodward, 2004). Or, children may not believe that mathematics is attributable to effort, hard work, andmistakes (Boaler & Greeno, 2000). In the same way, teachers may have their own perceptions and beliefs aboutknowing and learning (Boaler, 2011). All or some part of these factors change learning and the goals thatchildren and teachers set for themselves in the small environment.Implications: Advancing or reducing shared understandingsImplications of this work are threefold. First, if researchers and teachers respond to the complexity of children’sthinking in the small environment, then children respond to adults and adapt to the environment. They eithermatch “how they see things” to what they perceive, are exposed to, or interact with (utilize existing mentalschemes to make sense), or not (change existing mental schemes to make sense). In either case, the child makesan adaptation in themselves to “understand”, not assimilate to, the environment.Second, I argue that this definition of knowing and learning is far more empowering to childrenthought to have a cognition that could begin differently than a definition that seeks to impose onto childrenknowledge that they may not make sense to them. Zawojewski, Magiera, & Lesh (2013) illuminate why somechildren do not “progress” past certain ways of knowing:Do all students optimally learn along a particular normalized path (learning line, learningtrajectory)? Do all students learn the “end product” in the same way? Likely not…. Particulargoals for students’ learning [are] regions… that are individualistic and dependent on a varietyof interacting factors. (p. 473).Finally, bi-directional constructions of understanding speaks to the human endeavor. Equilibration,then, can become multi-dimensional: a dilation and revitalization to children and teachers. Truly sharedunderstandings can be a real result. This multi-dimensional knowing and learning is an expansion of childdriven negotiations of small environments into larger societies and shared, valuable understandings in STEMeducation.Selected ReferencesBoaler, J. (2016). Mathematical mindsets: Unleashing students’ potential through creative math, inspiringmessages, and innovative teaching. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.Brown, A. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.Piaget, J. (1951). The child's conception of the world (No. 213). Rowman & Littlefield.AcknowledgmentsThe work reported on in this paper is funded by the National Science Foundation, award #1708327. The authorwishes to thank her advisors who helped shape the ideas in this paper.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1470© ISLS