Peer Scaffolding to Learn Science inSymmetrical Groups Collaborating Over TimeNicole D. Martin, University of Wisconsin – Madison, ndmartin@wisc.eduDana Gnesdilow, University of Wisconsin – Madison, gnesdilow@wisc.eduSadhana Puntambekar, University of Wisconsin – Madison, puntambekar@education.wisc.eduAbstract: While educators often assume that students working together in symmetrical groupssupport each other’s learning, this scaffolding may look very different from scaffolding inasymmetrical relationships. Little is known about how students in symmetrical groups supportone another to learn. We examined scaffolding interactions of two symmetrical groups ofstudents as they worked on physics simulations over time. We analyzed the interactions withineach group to understand how students support their peers to learn science. We found thatstudents in Group A had a significantly greater proportion of scaffolding discourse thanstudents in Group B, but there were no significant differences in students’ learning gainsbetween the two groups. However, we found that one student in each group emerged as amore dominant scaffolder by driving the discourse and helping the group move forward withthe task; this student made the most learning gains in each group.Keywords: scaffolding, symmetrical peers, collaboration, science educationIntroductionTeachers cannot feasibly provide individual support to all of their students simultaneously in a classroom. Onepotential strategy to disperse the responsibility of instructing many students at the same time is to have studentswork together in small groups. Educators often assume that students in small groups will help each other learn(Webb, Baxter, Thompson, 1997); however, it is still unclear how support from peers affects students’ learning.Can peers actually provide the necessary support to help each other learn? Evidence that peers can successfullysupport each other to learn together would further encourage utilizing small group work in the classroom.Scaffolding describes the individualized support a teacher can provide to a student in order to help thatstudent accomplish tasks that he or she would not be able to accomplish alone (Wood, Bruner, & Ross, 1976).This traditional notion of scaffolding involves an asymmetrical relationship between a student and a morecapable other, often an adult teacher. Collaborative learning, however, refers to a group of students workingtogether to learn or solve a problem; this usually involves a symmetrical group of peers who are often assumedto be of equal ability, prior knowledge, and status (Dillenbourg, 1999). While the symmetry of knowledge mayshift between peers, the symmetry of status and participation is typically held constant. Scaffolding insymmetrical peer groups may therefore emerge as a mutual process in which different students scaffold atdifferent times as symmetry of knowledge fluctuates (Sangin, Molinari, Nussli, & Dillenbourg, 2008).Rogoff (1990) showed that there are interesting differences in the scaffolding that takes place withinsymmetrical versus asymmetrical relationships. We should not expect peer scaffolding to look the same asteacher-student scaffolding; the expert-novice relationship between a teacher and student is characterized byassessing the student’s understanding and ability so that support can be specifically tailored to the unique needsof the student, whereas peers may not be able to assess others’ needs and subsequently provide support in thesame way (Rogoff, 1990). Research shows that scaffolding among equally inexperienced peers may be lessexplicit and intentional than teacher scaffolding, but still results in the group of peers being able to solvecomplex problems and complete tasks together that they could not do alone (Wells, 1999; Zuckerman, 2003).With the exception of a few examples, such as reciprocal teaching (Palinscar & Brown, 1984) and thinkingtogether (Dawes, Mercer, & Wegerif, 2000), in which students are trained to give specific kinds of support andteachers intentionally model what scaffolding should look like in a specific context, students working incollaborative groups are usually not trained to scaffold in such an intentional way.It is important to examine group discourse to understand whether peers play a supportive role and helpeach other learn. Research in computer supported collaborative learning has shown that groups whoacknowledge, discuss, and build upon each other’s proposals learn more than groups who ignore or rejectproposals without discussion (e.g., Barron, 2003; Roschelle, 1992). Drawing from the traditional notion ofscaffolding (Wood, Bruner, & Ross, 1976; Puntambekar & Kolodner, 2005), discourse including promptingpeers, checking in to establish common goals and assess understanding, explaining concepts, and responding toothers’ questions would be indicative of quality group collaboration, which would benefit peers’ learning. Thus,CSCL 2015 Proceedings340© ISLSwe approach the investigation of small group collaboration from a peer scaffolding perspective, and wehypothesize that groups of students who exhibit these types of discourse would learn more than groups ofstudents who do not engage in these scaffolding interactions. The reciprocal nature of interactions is a keyaspect of scaffolding, so it is also important to understand how individuals contribute to the group’s discourse.In the current study, we take a more in depth look into the scaffolding interactions that unfolded in twogroups of 6th grade students with similar initial levels of prior knowledge working together on virtual physicssimulations over a 12-week period. We aim to answer the question: How do symmetrical peers, workingtogether in small groups, provide the support necessary to help each other learn science? To address thisquestion, we first examined students’ discourse to determine the types of interactions indicative of scaffoldingamong peers and how individuals contribute to these interactions. We also analyzed how these scaffoldinginteractions might relate to students’ learning.MethodsParticipants and instructional contextWe examined two groups (Group A and Group B) of four 6th grade students in their science classroom as theyworked together during a physics unit. The students attended a US Midwestern public school located in a midsized city. The two groups of students were from the same science class, with a total of 27 students, taught by ateacher with three years of experience implementing the CoMPASS curriculum used in this study. We chosethese groups for analysis based on the similarities in individual students’ initial scores within the groups on apretest of physics knowledge, since comparable prior knowledge is an important characteristic of symmetricalpeers. We focused on using prior knowledge to define peers as symmetrical given the availability of this data.The unit was a 12-week design-based curriculum in which students learned the physics concepts offorces, motion, work, and energy through investigating how to design a roller coaster. This curriculum reliedheavily on the students driving their own learning through conducting experiments and research in small groups,instead of the teacher being the predominant source of information. The groups had autonomy to make decisionsabout experiments related to four major sections of their roller coasters (the car lift, the initial drop, hills, andstopping the car), and the students worked together to draw conclusions from these experiments in order tounderstand the physics behind their roller coaster design. Each small group worked together on one computer toparticipate in a total of nine simulated experiments addressing the different sections of their roller coaster. Thestudent-centered and inquiry-based nature of this curriculum provided a rich context to investigate how studentssupport each other to learn because learning outcomes would largely relate to the learning that occurred duringgroup work, as opposed to information students might learn directly from the teacher.Data sources and analysisPre- and posttest measuresThe students were given a physics content knowledge test before beginning the unit to assess their priorknowledge and again after completing the unit to assess their learning gains. The test consisted of 29 multiplechoice questions addressing the physics concepts and relationships that the roller coaster unit was designed toteach. Each correct answer earned one point and incorrect answers earned zero points. Content validity of thetest was established by consulting with physics experts. Groups A and B were chosen as the participants of thisstudy based on the similarities of their physics pretest scores; the students in Group A had individual scores of16, 17, 18, and 19 and students in Group B had individual scores of 14, 15, 15, and 16. We thus concluded thatthe students within the groups were symmetrical in that they had similar levels of initial physics knowledge.Analysis of group discourseThe discourse within Group A and Group B was analyzed in order to investigate whether interactions to supportthe group’s learning took place. We selected four videos of each group conducting virtual simulationexperiments over the course of the unit; we selected the first video from each of the four sections of the unit toensure the groups were completing the same activities and to capture students’ discourse over multiple weeks.One group member from Group B was absent for the car lift simulation, so the remaining three simulations wereused for analysis, resulting in six videos in total, three for each group, occurring over a span of four weeks.The videos were transcribed, and we segmented the transcripts into lines based on turns of talk. Wefirst qualitatively characterized the interactions among students in the two groups from the videos. We thenquantified these interactions by coding each turn of talk for both the “content of talk” (what students weretalking about) and the “role of talk” (what contribution the statements were making to the group). Descriptionsand examples of codes are shown in Table 1.CSCL 2015 Proceedings341© ISLSThe “content of talk” codes were developed based on our observations of what students talked about,including: a) science, b) metacognitive, c) procedural, d) off task, and e) not applicable content. We identifiedthe codes of science and metacognitive talk (italicized in Table 1) as being beneficial interactions for learning,since students would need to engage in science related and reflective talk to develop conceptual understanding.The “role of talk” codes were first developed based on the theories of learning through scaffoldingdiscussed previously, including (italicized in Table 1): i) prompting collaboration for knowledge building, ii)checking in, iii) explaining, and iv) responding. Additional codes were later developed based on ourobservations of the data in order to further characterize the interactions among students, including: v) seekinghelp, vi) managing, vii) arguing, viii) reporting, and ix) not applicable role.Each turn of talk could be assigned multiple codes. Since the context in which a turn of talk occurredwas important in understanding the content of and type of talk that occurred, the discourse occurring before andafter a particular turn of talk were taken into consideration in assigning codes. Inter-rater reliability wascomputed using Kappa; the first and second authors coded 15% of the transcripts, resulting in substantialagreement (Stemler, 2001) overall (K = 0.69) and on all but two individual codes—seeking help and responding.Discrepancies were resolved and the first author coded the remaining transcripts.Table 1: Coding categories for examining student interactions during simulationsCodeContent of talk:ScienceMetacognitiveProceduralOff taskNot applicablecontentRole of talk:PromptingcollaborationChecking inExplainingDescriptionExamplesUsing science terms and / or discussing science concepts,definitions, and relationshipsReflective statements that show a higher level of thinking orawareness about what is happeningDiscussing how to accomplish tasks or making decisionsabout simulations without discussing science contentDiscussing topics unrelated to science or the simulationIt is unclear what students are talking aboutSeeking involvement of others; posing questions / statementsto prompt group to work together to build knowledgeInquiring if others understand the task and current plan orasking others to repeat something.Describing science concepts or relationships to other groupmembers.Responding“If the height of the car increases, thework, required, will increase”“Okay, can we re-do trial 4? 'Cause Ifeel like my data was un-accurate.”“Well we have to write this down. Waitwe need to record the beginning.”“No I think we need more flutes andclarinets and less trumpets”“So basically, so…,” (unintelligible)“So what are we gonna make theapplied force, guys?”“Does everyone agree on that? ““Like, as the height increases so doesthe distance. In order to keep it at thesame angle.”“Yeah I had to raise the increments too“What do you write? I don’t know whatthis means.”“Write it down quick! Write it downquick quick quick!”“You’re a control freak.”“Acceleration is 9.15.”Answering questions posed by other group members.Explicitly asking others for help and explanation, or statingSeeking helpconfusion.Giving orders, telling others what to do, bringing others backManagingto focusArguingBickering, argumentative, rude, or confrontational talk.Providing surface observations or interpretations of data,Reportingopinions without justification and/or support for predictions.Not applicableUnfinished or unclear statements, filler speech, off task talk“Yeah,” “Okay,” (unintelligible)rolenot considered to be arguing, or repeating others’ statements.Average interrater reliability: K = .69. Italics denote codes related to scaffolding and beneficial peer interactions for learning.FindingsQuantitative analysis of differences in discourse between group A and group BTo examine the nature of interactions in the two groups, we quantitatively analyzed the overall discourse by thetotal proportion of talk in each category. We divided the frequency (shown in parentheses in Table 2) of eachtype of talk over all three simulations by the total turns of talk for each group. We then conducted a test ofhomogeneity of proportions comparing the total proportions of talk in each category across all three simulations,as shown in Table 2, to evaluate whether there were statistical differences in the discourse present betweenGroup A and Group B. We were specifically interested in whether the students in Group A exhibited moreCSCL 2015 Proceedings342© ISLSdiscourse related to scaffolding and beneficial interactions for learning science than Group B and whether GroupB exhibited more off task and arguing discourse than Group A. We compared the two groups on all 14categories and thus used the Bonferroni correction resulting in an alpha of .0036 for each comparison.Table 2: Proportions (and frequencies) of talk across all three simulations and between group comparisons.Type of talkGroup AScience0.04 (28)Metacognitive0.02 (15)Procedural0.59 (463)Off task0.11 (85)Not applicable content0.21 (164)Role of talkPrompting collaboration0.07 (54)Checking in0.12 (98)Explaining0.02 (19)Responding0.10 (77)Seeking help0.01 (6)Managing0.13 (102)Arguing0.03 (22)Reporting0.21 (162)Not applicable role0.34 (268)Italics denote types of talk we associate with scaffolding and beneficial interactionslevel based on the Bonferroni correction for multiple comparison.Content of talkGroup BZ score0.00 (3)4.67*0.00 (1)3.58*0.49 (427)4.22*0.33 (289)-11.43*0.18 (161)1.300.02 (18)4.72*0.10 (90)1.420.01 (8)2.370.05 (45)3.61*0.01 (9)-0.570.16 (140)-1.720.11 (95)-6.67*0.13 (114)4.12*0.48 (423)-5.90*for learning. * p < .0036, significanceGroup A showed significantly more science and metacognitive talk (both of which we associate to be beneficialfor learning science) and significantly more scaffolding related talk of prompting collaboration and responding.Group A additionally showed significantly more procedural talk and reporting than Group B. In contrast, GroupB showed significantly more off task talk and arguing.Individual contributions to group’s scaffolding discourseTo better understand the interactions indicative of scaffolding among peers, we took a more in depth look atindividual students’ discourse. Taking an individual perspective on each student’s contribution to the groupdiscourse allowed us to see the role each student played in the scaffolding interactions. We looked at the totalfrequency that individual students in Group A (Ravi, Anna, Owen, and Violet) and Group B (Henry, Ron,Silverio, and Max) engaged in each type of talk. Figure 1 shows the number of times individual students inGroup A exhibited each type of talk. Most noticeably, Ravi contributed the most to Group A and engaged in themost prompting collaboration, checking in, and responding - all indicative of helping collaboration among groupmembers. He also engaged in the most procedural talk and reporting so the group could complete their task.VioletReportingArguingOwenManagingAnnaSeekinghelpRespondingExplainingCheckinginPromptingOff taskProceduralMetacognitiveRaviScienceFrequencyGroup A Individuals' Discourse200180160140120100806040200Figure 1. Group A individual students’ contribution to group discourseCSCL 2015 Proceedings343© ISLSFigure 2 shows the number of times individual students in Group B exhibited each type of talk. Silveriocontributed the most to Group B’s discourse and exhibited most incidents of prompting collaboration,explaining, and responding, which are again indicative of helping group collaboration. He also engaged in themost procedural talk, managing, and reporting in order to move the group towards completing their experiments.SilverioMaxArguingReportingManagingRonSeekinghelpRespondingExplainingCheckinginPromptingOff taskProceduralMetacognitiveHenryScienceFrequencyGroup B Individuals' Discourse200180160140120100806040200Figure 2. Group B individual students’ contribution to group discourseWe also summed each student’s total frequency of talk related to scaffolding and beneficial interactionsfor learning (the codes italicized in Table 2) and divided by the total number of scaffolding and learningdiscourse of the group. This analysis revealed that Ravi emerged as having the highest proportion of talkbeneficial and supportive to learning in Group A at 0.42, compared to Anna at 0.20, Owen at 0.24, and Violet at0.21. In Group B, Silverio had the highest proportion of this talk at 0.44, compared to Henry at 0.17, Ron at0.15, and Max at 0.24. These findings show that Ravi (Group A) and Silverio (Group B) were the predominantscaffolders in their respective groups. It is important to note here that while both groups had more capablestudents emerge as the dominant scaffolders, these more capable students had quite different styles ofinteracting with their peers. We conducted a test of homogeneity of proportions to compare Ravi and Silverio’stalk. We found that Ravi engaged in a significantly more science talk, z = 2.24, p < .05; promotingcollaboration, z = 2.22, p < .05; and responding z = 2.67, p < .01, than Silverio. We also found that Silverioengaged in a significantly more off task talk, z = -3.83, p < .01; managing, z = -3.87, p < .01; and arguing, z = 2.65, p < .01, than Ravi.Qualitative description of peer interactions in group A and group BTo further exhibit the differences between the groups’ discourse and interactions reported above, we identifiedexamples typical of each groups’ talk and provided a qualitative description to further illustrate the peerinteractions in Group A and Group B. In Group A, all of the students generally worked together to solveproblems during all three simulations. They stayed focused on the simulation experiments, discussed scienceconcepts and relationships, prompted one another to collaborate, explained science concepts and relationships,and responded to each other’s questions. Ravi more frequently attempted to scaffold his peers than other groupmembers did, and he drove the group’s discourse towards a conceptual focus by prompting his peers to worktogether to understand what was happening in their simulation experiments.The following transcript excerpt shows an example of how the students in Group A were engaged intrying to understand science concepts and relationships during the virtual simulation experiments, workedtogether in a collaborative and non-argumentative manner, and checked in with and responded to one another.1: Anna2: Ravi3: RaviCSCL 2015 ProceedingsI wanna like - not the lift. I just wanna see, I wanna see like how fast it'll go ifit does add friction because I'm just extremely curious. Ohh okay.Whoa the last, this, okay. Can we run the last trial again? With no friction,and, what, that's freaky.Okay, can we re-do trial 4? 'Cause I feel like my data was un-accurate. Okaylook at this though. As it goes up .2, this one's around 2. This one's .8, it goesup .8. Now this one is around 3 and 4, it went up 6. And this one, went up, this344© ISLSis about .4, it went up 5...4: Anna5: Violet6: Ravi7: Anna8: Violet9: Anna10: Ravi11: Anna12: Ravi13: Anna14: Ravi15: Anna16: Ravi17: AnnaWant me to play it?Well I'm just gonna keep it in case...It's inaccurate.Guys can I?Sure.Kay it's, uh oh, sorry. The last three, 3.96.Okay, put um, the lift height maximum, oh you can just. And put like, halffriction.Oh wait, the initial drop correct?Uh huh, yeah.Okay and I don't think that it'll work. 'Cause I tried...No still?See, it, it stops, but maybe if we add the uh, friction to the cart...Oh my god. hahaha.It'll just stop. I wonder what would happen if-This excerpt shows an example of how Ravi guided the group, specifically in lines 2 and 3, to think about thephysics relationships the group is experimenting with in the simulations and engaged in metacognitive talk(lines 3 and 6). This example also shows Anna and Ravi collaborating and responding to one another to betterunderstand what was happening in their simulation.In contrast, Group B’s interactions were less productive overall and more focused on completingassignments. These students were frequently off task, argued with each other, and rarely attempted to scaffoldeach other. Their discussions about the simulations were procedural and focused mainly on task completion, asopposed to trying to understand the physics. Silverio noticeably took charge and managed the group by tellingothers what to do, making sure they were recording answers, and doing most of the work for the group. WhileSilverio seemed to be the most engaged with the simulation experiments and to have the best understanding ofwhat was happening, he rarely attempted to support his peers by prompting them to collaborate and explainingscience ideas.The transcript excerpt below shows Group B’s focus on task completion instead of conceptualunderstanding; it also exemplifies Silverio’s characteristic managing style as he repeatedly tells his peers towrite the answers down.1: Silverio2: Ron3: Henry4: Silverio5: Ron6: Silverio7: Max8: SilverioOkay guys, start getting this stuff down. 5.9...Where's my pencil?The lord took it.Guys! Get this down or I'll just hit start and I wont...Wait! I don't know where my pencil wentQuick quick quick!Write it down quick! Write it down quick quick quick!I'm gonna hit it.Silverio was clearly not concerned if his peers understood the answers they were writing; he simplywanted them to “get this down” so he could move on and run the next simulation experiment. Additionally,Henry’s comment in line 3 provided a glimpse into the typical irrelevant and off task comments that wererepeatedly made by this group. A second excerpt from Group B (below) further shows the characteristic arguingand managing interactions of this group.1: Ron2: Silverio3: Max4: Silverio5: Max6: Silverio7: Max8: SilverioCSCL 2015 ProceedingsThe maximum acceleration... Guys we need the maximum acceleration.It's right there. MeoowWhat the heck. This makes no sense.It makes ton of sense! What're you looking for? What're you looking for?Move. Maximum acceleration...It's right there! I just pointed at it. For the fifth time I'm done pointing it out.((inaudible talking, grumbling)) Stop speaking Japanese!You stop speaking Japanese!345© ISLSIn this excerpt, Max and Silverio both used argumentative and frustrated tones. Line 6 shows Silverio’sunwillingness to help Max further, even though Max was still confused. This was a missed opportunity forSilverio and the other group members to provide support and help Max learn.Analysis of learning gainsWe initially hypothesized that groups of students who engaged in more talk related to scaffolding and in morescience and metacognitive talk would learn more than students who engaged in less of these types of talk.Following our findings from quantitative analyses and qualitative observations of the interactions between peersin Group A and Group B, we thus hypothesized that Group A would have learned more than Group B over thecourse of the physics unit. It is important to remember that the students started with similar physics priorknowledge, so learning gains are not attributed to differences in prior knowledge.To compare the learning gains between the students in Group A (N=4) to those in Group B (N=4), weconducted an independent samples Mann-Whitney U test. Learning gains were calculated by dividing eachstudent’s actual gain between the physics pre- and posttest by the total possible gains that each student couldhave made. Calculating learning gains in this way, based on percentages as opposed to raw score differences,presents students’ learning in terms of the amount they could have learn. The results of the test were notsignificant, z = -1.16, p = .25. Thus, there was no significant difference in the learning gains made by students inGroup A versus Group B, despite clear differences in their discourse during the unit.Further examination of the individual students’ learning gains (reported in Table 3) showed that Ravi(Group A) and Silverio (Group B) made the largest gains in their respective groups. Thus, while there was nosignificant difference in overall learning gains between the students in Group A and Group B, the student ineach group who contributed the most to the scaffolding discourse learned more than his respective peers.Table 3: Individual students’ learning gainsGroupABStudentRaviAnnaOwenVioletHenryRonSilverioMaxPretest1819161714151615Posttest2119191217192417Learning gain27.27%0.00%23.08%-41.67%20.00%28.57%61.54%14.29%Discussion and implicationsEducators often utilize small group work with the assumption that students will support and help each otherlearn, alleviating the teacher’s struggle to simultaneously address many individual students’ issues (Webb et al.,1997). However, the interactions that occur in a group and the ways in which peers support each other aredifferent from teacher-student scaffolding. The goal of this paper was to better understand how students workingtogether in symmetrical groups of peers support each other to learn. We specifically investigated 1) how thestudents in two different groups engaged in the types of talk we identified as related to scaffolding andbeneficial to learning and 2) whether the presence of these types of talk related to students’ learning over thecourse of the physics unit.We found striking differences in how the students in our two groups interacted with each other. WhileGroup A appeared to collaboratively work together and help their peers by prompting one another, respondingto questions, and checking in with each other, Group B rarely appeared to support one another’s learning. Thestudents in Group A often focused on the physics content and discussed the science concepts and relationshipsbehind the simulations, whereas the students in Group B frequently argued with each other and were often offtask.However, the most striking difference we found was that a more capable student emerged in bothgroups, contributing the most to and driving the discourse – but the ways in which this more capable studentinteracted with and supported their peers looked quite different. While the more capable student who emerged inGroup A (Ravi) most frequently attempted to support his peers and guide the group towards understanding thephysics concepts and relationships, the student who emerged in Group B (Silverio) frequently gave orders to hispeers and was mainly concerned that the group completed the task at hand. Both Ravi and Silverio offeredCSCL 2015 Proceedings346© ISLSsupport, but their support differed in line with their groups’ overall discourse patterns with one student givingsupport for collaboration and conceptual understanding while the other gave support for completing tasks andstaying focused.Even though members in Group A worked collaboratively, their learning gains were not significantlygreater than those of students in Group B. The findings in this study seem to contrast Barron’s (2003) findingsthat the quality of group collaboration has important influences on student learning. Barron showed that groupsin which students acknowledge, discuss, and build on others’ ideas (similar to Group A) learn more thanstudents who ignore or reject others’ proposals (similar to Group B). However, what we found was that thestudent in both groups who acted as the “scaffolder” by driving the discourse and helping the group moveforward with the task showed the most learning gains (see Table 3). This brings up interesting issues about howwe can help group members support each other and about the interactions between the more capable peer andother group members. Despite the potential of having a more capable peer in small a group to support othergroup members, our results show that students may lack the intention (Wells, 1999; Zuckerman, 2003) or ability(Rogoff, 1990) to scaffold and help their peers learn. Students may rarely attempt to scaffold or support theirpeers, as seen in Group B, or students may not be able to provide the appropriate support needed to help theirpeers learn, as seen in Group A. In future work, we aim to better understand the interplay between scaffoldingand collaboration, specifically helping group members support each other, in addition to providing them withguidance for better collaboration (e.g., Mercer & Littleton, 2007). We also aim to better understand the role thatcollaborative interactions play in learning and how the teacher might complement those interactions to fosterlearning of all group members.ReferencesBarron, B. (2003). When Smart Groups Fail. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307–359.Dawes, L., Mercer, N., & Wegerif, R. (2000). Thinking together. Birmingham: The Questions PublishingCompany.Dillenbourg, P. (1999). What do you mean by collaborative learning?. Collaborative-learning: Cognitive andComputational Approaches. 1-19.Mercer, N., & Littleton, K. (2007). Dialogue and the development of children's thinking: A socioculturalapproach. Routledge.Palincsar, A., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal Teaching. Cognition and Instruction, 1(2), 117–175.Puntambekar, S., & Kolodner, J. L. (2005). Toward implementing distributed scaffolding: Helping studentslearn science from design. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42(2), 185-217.Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive development in social context. Oxford UniversityPress.Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 2(3), 235-276.Sangin, M., Molinari, G., Nüssli, M. A., & Dillenbourg, P. (2008). Knowing what the peer knows: Thedifferential effect of knowledge awareness on collaborative learning performance of asymmetric pairs.In Times of Convergence. Technologies Across Learning Contexts (pp. 384-394). Springer BerlinHeidelberg.Stemler, S. (2001). An overview of content analysis. Practical Assessment, Research & Evaluation, 7(17).Webb, N. M., Baxter, G. P., & Thompson, L. (1997). Teachers' grouping practices in fifth-grade scienceclassrooms. The Elementary School Journal, 91-113.Wells, G. (1999). Dialogic inquiry: Towards a sociocultural practice and theory of education. New York:Cambridge University Press.Wood, D., Bruner, J.S., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child Psychology& Psychiatry & Allied Disciplines, 17, 89–100.Zuckerman, G. (2003). The learning activity in the first years of schooling: The developmental path towardsreflection. In A. Kozulin, B. Gindis, V. S. Ageyev, & S. M. Miller (Eds.), Vygotsky’s educationaltheory in cultural context (pp. 177-199). Cambridge: Cambridge U. Press.AcknowledgmentsWe thank all of our student and teacher participants. This research has been supported by the Bill & MelindaGates Foundation and EDUCAUSE NGLC grant and NSF SAVI grant # 1258471.CSCL 2015 Proceedings347© ISLS