Concept Mapping Narratives to Promote CSCL andInterdisciplinary StudiesReneta D. Lansiquot, New York City College of Technology, rlansiquot@citytech.cuny.eduCandido Cabo, New York City College of Technology, ccabo@citytech.cuny.eduAbstract: Concept maps are used to organize and represent information. In the context ofcreating narratives, concept maps can be used to represent the elements of a plot and/or therelationships between characters. Concept mapping has been shown to be an effective prewriting strategy leading to an improvement in student writing. We have investigated the use ofconcept maps to help students develop narratives in an introductory undergraduate Englishcomposition course. We found that students participating in an interdisciplinary learningcommunity (LC) who implement their narratives collaboratively as a video game usingcomputer programming produce better concept maps than students in a traditional Englishcomposition course. We conclude that the synergies that develop between Englishcomposition and computer programming in the interdisciplinary context of a LC result inmore effective concept maps leading to an improvement in students’ performance in Englishcomposition courses.Keywords: collaborative writing, concept maps, creative writing, narrative, game-based learningIntroductionAn effective approach for teaching introductory English composition is using concept maps as part of a firstyear learning community (LC), a group of students who enroll in two or more courses, generally in differentdisciplines that are linked together by a common theme, in an academic semester. LCs are one of the ten highimpact educational practices recognized nationally to improve student performance and increase studentretention (Kuh, 2008). In this case, students enrolled in Computer Systems (an introductory course to problemsolving and computer programming, CS1, and an introduction to the field of computer systems, CS0) andEnglish Composition, EG1, which previous research studies have found to improve student retention andacademic performance (see Cabo & Lansiquot, 2014; Cabo & Lansiquot, 2013; Lansiquot & Cabo, 2011;Lansiquot, Satyanarayana, & Cabo, 2014). In our LCs, students develop narratives (schematic structuring oftemporal actions or a plot: for instance, the hero’s journey structure) and implement their narratives as a videogame prototype. In EG1, students collaboratively write original video game narratives in groups and explorehuman-computer interaction (HCI); in their CS1 computer programming class, students implement these storiesusing Alice, a computer programming environment that supports the creation of three-dimensional animations;and, in the CS0 survey course, students explore artificial intelligence (AI) and hardware issues to describe apossible game delivery platform. The concepts and skills introduced in the computer courses are contextualizedby a problem (game design) that is relevant to students and connected to concepts and skills developed in thewriting course. The common assignment across the three courses in this LC is a design document, whichincludes three sections: analysis (video game narrative, target audience, review of competing games, anddelivery platforms); design (player characteristics, game mechanics, challenge, and description of the mediaplatform); and project description (video game prototype, review of relevant literature, pseudo code, flowchart,concept map, and storyboards). The review of relevant literature section concerns AI and HCI as these relate totheir video game project.In the LC EG1 course, students used the hero’s journey plot structure to write an original backgroundstory for a video game and then presented their ideas to the class. A few ideas were chosen to be developed further,and students collaboratively revised these chosen stories with their group, first using concept maps to represent thecurrent story. Finally, students individually developed an engaging character side-quest and accompanying conceptmap, including the rationale for the importance of such a quest to the protagonist as well as to the target audienceof the game.In the non-LC EG1 course, students integrated digital media to further develop their stories as, forexample, a movie. In this course, the design document included the analysis (background story, target audience,literature review, review of existing related narrative projects and unique characteristics, and media selection) andproject description (narrative of project design, concept map, and storyboards), but not the design section. Thereview of relevant literature was replaced by a review of what makes a good narrative related to the genre ofCSCL 2015 Proceedings504© ISLStheir stories. Student focus was placed creating a background story for a character, and the hero of a video gamewas used as an example, including the target audience of the story, not of a game.Students created both group and individual concept maps, which were added to the concept map of thevideo game narrative. Concept maps are used to organize and represent information. As visualization tools, thesediagrams show the relationships between ideas and, in this instance, include linking concepts enclosed in circlesand relationships between concepts indicated by a connecting line. These concept maps illustrated, for example, asummary of a background story and the stages in the hero’s journey—depicted as a circle, it begins with theOrdinary World then moves to a Call to Adventure; the Refusal of the Call; Meeting the Mentor; Crossing theThreshold; Tests, Allies and Enemies; Approach the Inmost Cave, The Ordeal; Reward; the Road Back;Resurrection; Return with the Elixir and eventually returns to the Ordinary World (Campbell, 1949; Vogler,2007). Findings demonstrate that the intentional interdisciplinary contextualization of technology-supportedcollaborative learning helps students make connections that improve general academic performance.MethodsStudents used the Visual Understanding Environment (VUE), a free application that provides a flexible visualenvironment for structuring, presenting, and sharing digital information. VUE also provides support for in-depthanalysis of concept maps, with the ability to merge maps. One proposed method of assessing concept mapsbased on the components and structure of the map (Novak & Gowin, 1984) assigns points for valid propositions(1 point each), levels of hierarchy (5 points for each level), number of branches (1 point for each branch), crosslinks (10 points for each valid cross-link), and specific examples (1 point for each example). The number ofhierarchical levels addresses the degree of subsumption, the number of branches indicates the differentiation,and the number of cross-links indicates the extent to which the knowledge has been integrated. Anotherapproach to assessing concept maps is to use, and provide students with, a rubric.Table 1: Concept map assessment rubricCriterionBreadth of net4Map includes theimportant conceptsand describes domainon multiple levels3Map includes mostimportant concepts;describes domain onlimited number oflevels2Important conceptsmissing and/ordescribes domain ononly one level1Map includesminimum conceptswith many importantconcepts missingEmbeddedness andinter-connectednessAll conceptsinterlinked withseveral otherconceptsMost conceptsinterlinked with otherconceptsSeveral conceptslinked to otherconceptsFew concepts linkedto other conceptsUse of descriptivelinksLinks succinctly andaccurately describeall relationshipsLinks are descriptiveand valid for mostrelationshipsSome links unclearor vague; someinvalid or unclearLinks are vague;show inconsistentrelationshipsEfficient linksEach link type isdistinct from allothers, clearlydescribesrelationship; usedconsistentlyMost links aredistinct from others;discriminateconcepts; presentvariety ofrelationships; usedfairly consistentlySeveral links aresynonymous; don’tdiscriminate conceptswell; don’t show avariety ofrelationships; usedinconsistentlyMost linkssynonymous orvaguely describerelationships andaren't distinct fromother linksLayoutMap is contained in asingle page, hasmultiple clearhierarchies, is welllaid out and providesa sufficient numberof relevant exampleswith linksMap is contained in asingle page, hasseveral clearhierarchies, is fairlywell laid out andprovides a sufficientnumber of fairlyrelevant exampleswith linksMap is not containedin a single page, hasunclear hierarchies,is poorly laid out andprovides some fairlyrelevant exampleswith linksMap is not containedin a single page, isconfusing to readwith no hierarchicalorganizationNote: Criteria are evaluated on a 4-3-2-1-0 basis.CSCL 2015 Proceedings505© ISLSWe further adapted the concept map assessment rubric found at the Knowledge Innovation forTechnology in Education (KITE, 2003), with additions by Josephine McMurray, removing the last criterion“Development over time (for concepts maps where a ‘base map’ is constructed at the beginning of the courseand a corresponding ‘final map’ at the end of the course” (cf. Table 1; Center for Teaching Excellence, Rubricfor assessing concept maps, n.d.). In order to analyze individual student creations, a concept map developedover time was not applicable as their first iteration was developed as a group. Student concept maps includedtheir group story and their individual highlighted side-quest section. In the design document, the group storymap was synthesized and all side quests were added to show the complete video game narrative.Student and school sampleOur institution is one of the most racially, ethnically, and culturally diverse institutions of higher education inthe northeast United States: 31% of our students are African American, 35.6% are Hispanic, 20.6% are Asian orPacific Islanders, 11.6% are Caucasian, 0.5% are Native Americans, and 1.2% Other. The College’s fall 2014enrollment was 17,374.A typical English Composition course does not include a video game narrative theme and students donot have the opportunity to implement their stories; however, both the LC and non-LC courses help students todevelop their ideas by using rhetorical modes including narration, analysis, argumentative, compare andcontrast. LC students are recruited randomly and then given a list of linked course options.AnalysisTo quantify student performance, we compared the concept maps of students in our LC (n = 14), with studentstaking EG1 with the same instructor, but not as part of our LC in fall 2013 (n = 14). All students taking the LCcourse were majors in the Computer Systems degree and the non-LC students comprised different majors; no twostudents had the same major. For our analysis, we compared the rubric criterion (0-4) for the different categories ofthe concept maps (Table 1) between the LC and non-LC groups. For the statistical analysis, group meansdifferences were considered significant at the 0.05 level. We also qualitatively measured student performance byobserving their discussions during the group background story concept map production.FindingsFigure 1 below shows the performance of LC and non-LC students in developing an effective concept map oftheir story. Performance of LC students was significantly better than non-LC students in all categories except inthe use of descriptive links category, which was not statistically significant. When the average of all categorieswas considered, students in the LC also performed better than students not in the LC.Figure 1. Means and standard deviations of concept map category points for students in a LC (LC in grey;n=14), and not in a LC (non-LC in white; n=14). Totals are the average of all categories. p < 0.05 indicates thatthe difference of the group means is statistically significant.CSCL 2015 Proceedings506© ISLSStudents’ conversations during the production of the concept maps shed light on these results. Studentsare not clear on the difference between a flowchart and a concept map, in the excerpt below.LC Student 1:LC Student 2:LC Student 1:Is this concept map the same as a flowchart?I think so. It’s what happens in the story.I think we need to show how to make it [the story] happen.LC students, in the above excerpt, confused a flowchart that illustrates a problem, includes an input, processing,and output with a concept map that represents a story, includes the relationship between ideas. This confusionmay explain LC students’ non-significant performance in the use of descriptive links as they did not focus onthe relationship between links.Conclusions and implicationsConcept maps are not only useful as a learning tool but also as an evaluation tool (Mintzes, Wandersee, & Novak,2000; Novak, 1991). Based on these data, we can conclude that students in the LC group are able to develop betterconcept maps than students in the non-LC course. Since it has been shown that the creation of concept maps is aneffective pre-writing strategy that improves student writing, it is likely that the use of concept maps will result in anincrease in performance in EG1 courses. Therefore, we propose that that increase in performance is the result of thecontextualization of the learning experience that occurs in the LC: students apply writing and narrative concepts andskills to problems which are relevant to their interests (gaming) and to their major (computing). The benefit ofcontextualization could be understood in terms of Ausubel’s cognitive psychology idea that learning occurs (Ausubel,1968) when new concepts are assimilated into existing knowledge and frameworks held by the learner (i.e., into thelearner’s cognitive structure). The increase in performance could also be related to the fact that students in the LC findmeaning in their learning because it relates to previous knowledge (gaming) and since they can relate the EG1 to theirmajor they are more motivated and engaged. It is also possible that the LC environment also contributed to thesuccess of LC students in developing concept maps (Zhao & Kuh, 2004). Further studies will be necessary tounderstand in more detail the effect of our results, and to assess and compare performance in more specificconcepts and skills both in writing and computing for students taking those courses in the context of a LC andoutside a LC. For example to correlate the quality of the concept maps with the quality of the actual outcomes suchas video game designs, storylines, plots and characters. Students outside the LC were also taking other courses inaddition to EG1. It is possible that teaching EG1 in an interdisciplinary LC with courses outside computing mayalso lead to improved concept map performance.Computer programming and creative writing in context is effectively a collaborative activity. Not onlyintegrated digital media, but also intentional interdisciplinary approaches to writing allow students topurposefully connect and integrate knowledge. Linking English composition with computer programming in theinterdisciplinary context of a LC results in the improvement of students’ performance in English composition tosimilar to the increased level of their performance in the computer courses shown in our previous study(Lansiquot, Satyanarayana, & Cabo, 2014). Therefore, as to allow students outside the major to benefit from thesynergies that occur between writing stories and writing programs, we created general education (liberal arts andsciences) interdisciplinary writing-intensive co-taught course, Programming Narratives: Computer AnimatedStorytelling, in which students leverage problem-solving, computer programming and writing skills to produce anarrative-driven video game prototype. Students study the structure of narratives and are introduced to conceptsof problem solving using constructs of logic inherent in computer programming languages. Emphasis is placedon creative writing and computational thinking. This course will be offered for the first time in spring 2015 andwill include formative and summative assessment of our pedagogical approach.ReferencesAlice. (2014). Retrieved from http://www.alice.org.Ausubel, D. P. (1968). Education psychology: A cognitive view. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.Cabo, C., & Lansiquot, R. D. (2014). Synergies between writing stories and writing programs in problemsolving courses. In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference (pp. 888-896).New York: IEEE.Cabo, C., & Lansiquot, R. D. (2013). Development of interdisciplinary problem-solving strategies through gamesand computer simulations. In R. D. Lansiquot (Ed.), Cases on interdisciplinary research trends in science,CSCL 2015 Proceedings507© ISLStechnology, engineering, and mathematics: Studies on urban classrooms (pp. 268-294). New York:Information Science Reference.Campbell, J. (1949). The hero with a thousand faces. Navato, CA: New World Library.Center for Teaching Excellence. (n.d.). Rubric for assessing concept maps. University of Waterloo. Retrieved fromhttps://uwaterloo.ca/centre-for-teaching-excellence/teaching-resources/teaching-tips/assessing-studentwork/grading-and-feedback/rubric-assessing-concept-maps.KITE. (2003). Technology integration case library. Retrieved from http://kite.missouri.edu/action_MU2.htm.Kuh, G. D. (2008). High-impact educational practices. Washington, D.C.: AAC&U.Lansiquot, R. D., & Cabo, C. (2011). Alice’s adventures in programming narratives. In C. Wankel & R.Hinrichs (Eds.), Transforming virtual learning: Cutting-edge technologies in higher education (Vol. 4,pp. 311-331). Bingley, UK: Emerald.Lansiquot, R. D., Satyanarayana, A., & Cabo, C. (2014). Using interdisciplinary game-based learning to developproblem solving and writing skills. In Proceedings of the 121st American Society for EngineeringEducation Annual Conference. Washington, DC: ASEE.Mintzes, J. J., Wandersee, J. H., & Novak, J. D. (2000). Assessing science understanding: A humanconstructivist view. San Diego: Academic Press.Novak, J. D., & Gowin, D. B. (1984). Learning how to learn. New York: Cambridge University Press.Novak, J. D. (1991). Clarify with concept maps: A tool for students and teachers alike. The Science Teacher, 58,45-49.Visual Understanding Environment. (2014). Retrieved from http://vue.tufts.edu.Vogler, C. (2007). The writer’s journey: Mythic structures for writers (3rd ed.). Studio City, CA: Michael Wiese.Zhao, C., & Kuh, G. D. (2004). Adding value: Learning communities and student engagement. Research inHigher Education, 45(2), 115-138.CSCL 2015 Proceedings508© ISLS