In Search of Conversational Grain Size:Modeling Semantic Structure Using Moving Stanza WindowsAmanda L. Siebert-Evenstone, Golnaz Arastoopour, Wesley Collier, Zachari Swiecki,Andrew R. Ruis, and David Williamson Shafferalevenstone@wisc.edu, arastoopour@wisc.edu, swiecki@wisc.edu, wcollier@wisc.edu,arruis@wisc.edu, dws@education.wisc.eduUniversity of Wisconsin – MadisonAbstract: Analyses of learning based on student discourse need to account not only for thecontent of the utterances but also for the ways in which students make connections across turnsof talk. This requires segmentation of the discourse data to define when connections are likelyto be meaningful. In this paper, we present a novel approach to segmenting data for the purposesof modeling connections in discourse. Specifically, we use epistemic network analysis to modelconnections in student discourse using a temporal segmentation method adapted from recentwork in the learning sciences. We compare the results to a purely topic-based segmentationmethod to examine the affordances of temporal segmentation for modeling connections indiscourse.Keywords: sliding window, epistemic network analysis, segmentation, discourse analysisIntroductionAnalyzing high-volume discourse data is a challenge in computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL)environments because student conversations in these environments are characterized not only by what is said butby combinations of language use within social practices (Gee, 1990). This suggests that analyses of learning basedon student discourse need to account not only for the content of the utterances but also for the ways in whichstudents make connections across turns of talk. Any analysis of such connections, however, requires segmentationof discourse data to identify the conditions under which connections are likely to be meaningful (Hearst, 1994).In this paper, we present a novel approach to segmenting data for the purposes of modeling connections indiscourse. Specifically, we use epistemic network analysis (Shaffer et al., 2009) to model connections in studentdiscourse using a novel temporal segmentation method adapted from recent work in the learning sciences (Dyke,Kumar, Ai, & Rosé, 2012; Suthers & Desiato, 2012). We compare the results to a purely topic-based segmentationmethod to examine the affordances of temporal segmentation for modeling connections in discourse.TheoryThere are a number of theoretical perspectives in the learning sciences that describe understanding of a topic,process, domain, or practice in terms of the organization of students’ understanding—that is, the way concepts,skills, and habits of mind are related to one another systematically. Chi and colleagues (1981), for example, foundthat experts in physics organize their understanding differently than novices. Bransford and colleagues (1999)showed that the organization of experts’ content knowledge reflects their deep understanding of subject matter.diSessa (1988) suggests that that while solving physics problems does require understanding basic concepts fromthe discipline, deep and systematic understanding comes from linking those concepts to one another within atheoretical framework. Shaffer (2012) similarly characterizes learning as the development of an epistemic frame:a pattern of associations among knowledge, skills, habits of mind, and other cognitive elements that characterizescommunities of practice, or groups of people who share similar ways of framing, investigating, and solvingcomplex problems.Not surprisingly, research on discourse processing suggests that connections between concepts are madeprimarily on a topic-by-topic basis rather than across discourse as a whole. Gernsbacher’s (1991; see alsoGraesser, Gernsbacher, and Goldman, 1997) theory of language processing, for example, suggests that studentsuse the hierarchical organization of content to build understanding. Discourse is structured by topic, with conceptshaving clear relationships to one another within topics and few relationships across topics.Based on this idea, epistemic network analysis (ENA) analyzes the structure of connections in studentdiscourse by looking at the co-occurrence of concepts within the topics or activities that take place during learning.Building on the idea of learning as the development of an epistemic frame, ENA creates a network model ofthinking as based on the co-occurrence of skills, knowledge, values, and other elements of work in somecommunity of practice (Shaffer et al., 2009). In practical terms, ENA measures the structure of the connectionsICLS 2016 Proceedings631© ISLSamong types of talk by grouping utterances by activity into stanzas, or collections of related utterances. In otherwords, like many lines of work in CSCL and the learning sciences more generally, ENA looks at activities as afundamental unit of analysis.There are, however, two problems with such an approach. First, as Stahl, Koschmann, and Suthers (2006)argue, learning needs to be analyzed at both the group and the individual level. Stahl (2009), for example,conducted parallel qualitative analyses of the mathematics learning of a group and of the individuals in the group.But as Cress and Hesse (2013) point out, because learners work in groups, simple t-tests and ANOVAs do not doa good job of modeling the influence that groupmates have on one another. Providing a quantitative model ofgroup discourse that accounts for the contributions of any single individual within the group discussion is thus achallenging problem.A second problem is that aggregating connections by activity may take these connections out of context(Arvaja, Salovaara, Häkkinen, & Järvelä, 2007). While ideas are surely connected within topics or activities, thoseconnections are most likely to occur in close temporal proximity. During discussions, students simultaneouslybuild group and individual understanding by “saying” and replying to “what is said” (Wells, 1999). Speechtypically addresses another instance of speech and anticipates a response (Bakhtin, 1986). Because “thinking andspeech are, in this sense, always derivative of prior thinking and speech” (Smagorinsky, 2013, p. 23), studentsbuild on the ideas of their team members to mediate their discussion of concepts. Therefore, to measureconnections in conversations, we need a method to model connection-making on shorter time scales than entireactivities.Recent work by Dyke and colleagues (2012) and Suthers and Desiato (2012) proposes using slidingwindow analyses to model temporal connections in discourse. Rather than creating summary values for allutterances in an activity, a sliding window computes a value for a smaller section of an activity—typically a smallamount of time (e.g., 10 seconds) or a small number of utterances (e.g., three turns of talk; Dyke et al., 2012). Thewindow is sliding in the sense that a summary value is computed for each utterance, based on the preceding linesof talk (e.g., the preceding 10 seconds or three lines of talk). This type of analysis has been used to identify shiftsin topic (Rosé et al., 2008), and more generally to provide new insights on previously analyzed data (Dyke et al.,2012). Suthers and Desiato (2012) have used a sliding window approach to build a model of uptake—that is, tomodel connections in discourse. However, while their model showed when each actor used another actor’scontribution, this model only showed whether a connection was made, not what connection was made.In what follows, we use ideas from Gee (1991) to create an ENA model of connections in discourse usinga moving window approach. When analyzing discourse, Gee argues that single lines or utterances in talk aregrouped together into sets of related lines he calls stanzas. His analogy is to stanzas in a poem, and this is thesense in which ENA groups turns of talk to model the co-occurrence of ideas. But Gee also suggests that stanzasthemselves are grouped together into related sets that he calls strophes.In this study, we use the idea of strophes and stanzas to delineate two different approaches to modelingconnections using ENA, although it may be useful in other modeling approaches as well. In both cases, ENAmodels connections among concepts: (1) by identifying coherent topics, activities, and/or conversations in thedata as strophes; and (2) by defining collections of utterances within strophes that are related to one another asstanzas. The two methods differ in the relationship between strophes and stanzas. Specifically:1. The Strophe Method models connections within an entire activity or strophe: that is, all the utteranceswithin an activity are related to one another. Or, equivalently, each strophe is composed of a single stanza.2. The Moving Stanza Window Method models connections within an activity or strophe by dividing thestrophe into multiple stanzas: that is, utterances are related to one another only within some designatedstanza window. In other words, the moving stanza window method models connections only whenutterances are in close temporal proximity within a strophe.In what follows, we compare these two models by looking at data from a CSCL learning environment inwhich students collaboratively design solutions to engineering problems. To evaluate the strengths and limitationsof these two approaches to segmentation, we created ENA models for 10 teams using both the strophe methodand the moving stanza method. We focus here on the discourse of one team, and we ask:What are the similarities and differences in how the strophe method and the moving stanza windowmethod of segmenting data in ENA characterize the nature of connections in discourse?ICLS 2016 Proceedings632© ISLSMethodsThe engineering virtual internship RescuShellIn this study, we analyzed how students who are roleplaying as engineering interns in a virtual internship interactwithin their teammates. In RescuShell, student teams conduct research and simulated experiments to develop therobotic legs for a mechanical exoskeleton for use by rescue personnel. The virtual internship is separated into 17activities that simulate various steps in the design process, including reviewing and summarizing research reports,creating device prototypes, discussing design choices with teammates, and working to meet the needs of variousinternal consultants and external clients. In this study, we focused on the first eleven activities of the internship,in which students were assigned to one of five teams, each of which explores the use of a particular actuator inthe design (Hydraulic, PAM, Electric, Pneumatic, or Series Elastic). Forty-four first-year engineering studentsparticipated in the virtual internship, which took approximately 15 hours to complete. From this sample, weselected one team and analyzed how these five students (4 male, 1 female) discussed the design problem in thefirst half of the internship.Discourse analysesCoding student chatsWe coded each line of chat data using our Engineering Epistemic Frame Coding scheme, which identifies domainspecific epistemic frame elements (Shaffer & Arastoopour, 2014). We applied this coding scheme by using anautomated key word coding process that has been validated by comparing agreement between human andcomputer codes with resulting Cohen’s kappa scores between 0.80 and 0.98 (Chesler et al., 2015). The schemeincludes 10 codes:Data-based Justifications: Justifying decisions using data such as graphs, results, or numerical values.Design-based Justifications: Justifying decisions using design references such as prioritization.Client-based Justifications: Justifying decisions by referring to the client’s safety, health, or comfort.Consultant-based Justifications: Justifying decisions by stating the internal consultants’ preferences.Skill of Data: The action of using numerical values, results tables, graphs, or research papers.Skill of Design: The action of design development, prioritizing, tradeoffs, and design decisions.Skill of Collaboration: The action of facilitating a team meeting.Identity of Engineer: Identifying as an engineer; possession or ownership of work.Knowledge of Attributes: Referring to attributes: payload, recharge interval, agility, safety, or cost.Knowledge of Inputs: Referring to inputs: actuators, ROM, materials, power sources, or sensors.We then performed a Chronologically-Oriented Representations of Discourse and Tool-Related Activity(CORDTRA) analysis (Hmelo-Silver, Liu, & Jordan, 2009) during one activity to show the temporal pattern ofthe 10 codes in student discourse.Epistemic Network AnalysisENA models the structure of connections among engineering epistemic frame elements by quantifying the cooccurrences of codes within a stanza (Shaffer et al., 2009; Shaffer 2014). After defining the segmentationstructure, ENA creates an adjacency matrix representing the co-occurrences of codes in each stanza. To constructan adjacency matrix, ENA assigns a one for each unique pair of codes that co-occur one or more times in thoseutterances, and a zero for each unique pair that does not appear anywhere in the stanza. ENA sums the adjacencymatrices into a cumulative adjacency matrix, where each cell represents the number of stanzas (i.e., the numberof adjacency matrices) in which that unique pair of codes was present. Each unit of analysis is thus representedby a cumulative adjacency matrix that summarizes the pattern of connections among codes.ENA then converts the cumulative adjacency matrices into cumulative adjacency vectors that areprojected into a high-dimensional space based on the co-occurrence of codes across segments. These cumulativeadjacency vectors are normalized to control for the varying lengths of vectors by dividing each vector by its length;the resulting vector thus represents the relative frequency of co-occurrences. ENA then performs a singular valuedecomposition on the normalized vectors. This produces a rotation of the original high-dimensional space, suchthat the rotated space provides a reduced number of dimensions that capture the maximum variance in the data.The resulting models can be visualized as networks in which the nodes in the model are the codes andthe lines connecting the nodes represent the co-occurrence of two codes. Thus we can quantify and visualize theICLS 2016 Proceedings633© ISLSstructure of connections among engineering epistemic frame codes, making it possible to characterize studentdiscourse during the virtual internship.Comparison of segmentation proceduresIn this study, we compared two methods of segmenting data for use in ENA: the strophe method and the movingstanza window method. For the strophe method, ENA creates one adjacency matrix for each activity and thensums the matrices across the 11 activities for a given team.The moving stanza window method creates a referent adjacency matrix for each utterance, known as thereferring utterance. The referent adjacency matrix for each utterance is constructed of two types of co-occurrencesof codes: (1) co-occurrences within the referring utterance, and (2) co-occurrences of codes between the referringutterance and a specific number of previous utterances, known as the window. The moving window then movesto the next referring utterance and creates the next referent adjacency matrix. This process continues until the endof the strophe and then ENA sums the matrices across all utterances for that unit. No windows are made acrossactivities (strophes), only within them. Figure 1 shows how the strophe method and the moving stanza windowmethod create different models of connectivity.(a)(b)(c)(d)Figure 1. Example of coded data from one activity (a). The moving stanza window method analyzes connectionswithin the referring utterance and between the referring utterance and the window (b). After analyzing a window, themoving stanza method slides to the next utterance and repeats the process of finding connections within and betweenthe referring utterance and the window. The strophe method analyzes all connections in an activity (d).Co-occurrences of codes within or across non-referring utterances are not included in the referent adjacencymatrix, which eliminates double-counting of connections when the cumulative adjacency matrix is computed.Comparison of network modelsTo analyze the different segmentation methods using ENA, we created three models: (1) a strophe model for allteams in the sample, (2) a moving stanza window model with a window size of three for all teams in the sample,and (3) a moving stanza window model with a window size of three for all students in the sample, based on aqualitative analysis of the data that suggested most explicit connections between ideas in the discourse occurredwithin a span of 4 or fewer lines (the referring utterance plus the preceding three turns of talk). All three of thesesets were projected into the dimensional reduction for the team moving stanza model (Model 1) so the resultingnetworks could be compared. To analyze the differences between the two segmentation methods, we examinedthe discourse of one team whose models appeared to show different conclusions between methods. First, wecompared Model 1 with Model 2 to understand how each segmentation type modeled team discourse, then weused Model 3 to contrast connections between individuals.ResultsFor the purposes of this analysis, we looked at the conversations of one student project team. The Hydraulic teamhad five team members: Arden, Connor, Margaret, Jimmy, and Jordan. In what follows, we examine theircollaborative design work over the first 11 activities of the virtual internship, which include background researchinto principles of biomechanics, as well as the design, testing, and evaluation of an initial prototype for a roboticexoskeleton.Strophe and moving stanza window models for the hydraulic teamWe used the strophe method and the moving stanza window method to model the discourse of the team. Bothmodels (see Figure 1) show that the connections to and between the Skill of Data and the Knowledge of Inputswere prominent in the group’s design discussions. This is represented by larger node sizes and thicker lines in theENA network graph linking the nodes that correspond to those discourse elements. This is, of course, hardlyICLS 2016 Proceedings634© ISLSsurprising, as the group’s primary goal was to choose appropriate design features (inputs) to maximize the functionof their device.However, the strophe method (Figure 2a) suggests that the Hydraulic team connected these features ofdesign with explicit discussion of their collaboration process; in contrast, the moving stanza window method(Figure 2b) suggests that the team spent less time explicitly connecting talk about collaboration to their designwork and more time talking linking the Skill of Design to other elements of the problem space, representingexplicit discussion about the tradeoffs involved in the design process.(a)(b)Figure 2. Network graphs of the Hydraulic team’s discourse produced using (a) the strophe method and (b) themoving stanza window method. Thicker lines denote more frequent connections between codes. Percentagesindicate the amount of variance explained by each dimension, in this analysis, 54% of the total variance isaccounted for in this data set.This contrast is shown more clearly by computing the difference between the two network models (Figure 3).Figure 3 shows a higher number of connections in the strophe method (red lines in the figure) to the node for Skillof Collaboration, suggesting that links between the Skill of Collaboration and other elements of the epistemicframe of engineering are a prominent feature of student discourse in this model. In contrast, the moving stanzawindow method (blue) suggests that students made more connections to the Skill of Design.Figure 3. Subtracted network of the Hydraulic team’s discourse, in which blue connections occur morefrequently with the moving stanza method and red connections occur more frequently with the strophe method.Comparing connections within activitiesTo explore these differences between the two models, we examined the frequency of codes within each activityin the virtual internship. For example, when students met with their teammates to design devices, the discourseincluded references to the Skill of Collaboration, which was one of the key differences between the two models.To understand why there was such a substantial difference in connections to the Skill of Collaboration, weexamined the CORDTRA for this activity (Figure 4).The CORDTRA shows that students explicitly talked about collaboration only at the start and at the endof the activity. Applying the strophe method to this activity produced connections between Skill of Collaborationand codes that appeared at any point within the activity, even though students only talked explicitly aboutcollaboration at the beginning and the end of the discussion.ICLS 2016 Proceedings635© ISLSIn contrast, applying the moving stanza window produced connections between codes only if they cooccurred within close proximity, that is, within three utterances of the referring utterance. Thus, the moving stanzawindow model shows a less prominent role for the Skill of Collaboration.Skill of CollaborationKnowledge of AttributeIdentity of EngineerKnowledge of InputsConsultant­based JustificationsSkill of DesignDesign­based JustificationsSkill of DataData­based Justifications010203040Figure 4. CORDTRA diagram of Hydraulic team discourse codes during one activity.Contrasting connections between individualsA second consideration in comparing the strophe method and the moving stanza window method is that the strophemethod suffers from the same limitation as many extant techniques for modeling CSCL: it can model a groupconversation, but it does not do a good job of modeling the participation of one individual in the context of a groupdiscussion. The moving stanza window method, in contrast, can account for this important component ofcollaborative learning.The reason for this difference is that the strophe method uses a single adjacency matrix to model eachactivity, and that matrix incorporates the contributions of all members of the group. There is thus no good way todisentangle the contribution of any one individual. The moving stanza window method, on the other hand, modelseach utterance as an adjacency matrix, showing the connections it contributes to the group discourse. As a result,we can use the moving stanza window method to examine the connections that each individual makes to thecollaborative discussion of the group.For example, we modeled the contributions of two students, Connor and Jimmy, to the Hydraulic team’sdiscussion. We constructed a network model of each of two students’ contributions, where each model includesonly those stanza windows in which the referring utterance belonged to that individual (Figure 5). These modelsthus represent the unique contributions to the team discussion made by each student.(a)(b)Figure 5. Moving stanza window model for Connor (a) and Jimmy (b). Thicker lines denote more frequentconnections between codes.The networks using a moving stanza window method show that across all eleven activities, Connor andJimmy’s individual contributions to the group discourse differ. Connor’s network (Figure 5a) shows a highernumber of connections between Knowledge elements in the design domain suggesting that he commonlycontributed information about Attributes and Inputs in design discussion. On the other hand, Jimmy’s networkICLS 2016 Proceedings636© ISLS(Figure 5b) shows a higher number of connections between Skill of Data and Skill of Design suggesting that hisutterances integrated design tradeoffs into the group conversation.Table 1 illustrates this in a short excerpt from one of the group’s discussions about interpretingexperimental data. In this excerpt, Jimmy’s second comment (Line 2) makes a connection between the Skill ofData and the Skill of Design. He argues that graphs showing the results of benchmark testing (Skill of Data) helpthe team make an “informed decision” (Skill of Design) about their design choices. Two turns later (Line 4),Connor adds to the discussion by introducing information about specific attributes and inputs of the design: hetalks about the performance parameters (payload, agility, and battery life) of some of the design choices that theteam is considering (cadmium batteries and piezoelectric sensors).Critically, this model using the moving stanza window method shows that it is Connor who builds onJimmy’s discussion about data and design by contributing information about inputs and attributes. The movingstanza window methods separately models both Jimmy’s original contributions to the team discussion and the factthat Connor’s contribution builds on Jimmy’s utterance two lines before.Table 1: Brief excerpt of the Hydraulic team’s discussion of findings during the graphing activity.1StudentJimmy2Jimmy3Jordan4ConnorChat UtteranceThey all had both advantages and disadvantages. There was no "obvious" bestchoice.The graphs indicated the properties of all the different options and made acomparable visual illustration to make an informed decision on whichcombination to use.The graphs detailed what aspects of power sources and control sensors areimportant--namely, the numerical data.I suggested using cadmium batteries with piezoelectric sensors, together theymake a strong combination of payload and agility while keeping costs in amoderate range and having strong battery life.CodeSkill of Data,Skill of DesignSkill of Data,Knowledge of InputsKnowledge ofInputs, Knowledgeof AttributesDiscussionOur results thus suggest that the strophe method and the moving stanza window method identified different typesof connection-making in student discourse. In particular, the strophe method summarized the connections madeby student teams based on activity, but it could not differentiate individual contributions to team discussions. Themoving stanza method, in contrast, accounted for the connections that were made based on activity and temporalproximity; importantly, this method was also able to model the contributions of individual students to teamconversations.Of course, which of these models is most appropriate depends on the theory of discourse that is beingmodeled. For example, if we assume that talk at the beginning of an activity frames everything that follows—orsimilarly, if talk at the end of an activity builds on everything that preceded it—then the strophe method is moreappropriate, because it models connections among all of the talk within a single activity. If, on the other hand, wewant a model that is sensitive to the temporal proximity of talk, then the moving stanza window method is a betterchoice, as it models connections locally within an activity, such that very early turns of talk are not related to ideasthat arise much later in the discussion. In addition, the moving stanza window has the benefit of also modelingthe role of individual contributions to group discussions.This study, of course, is limited in that it focused on the activities of one group of students working inone CSCL context. However, this work highlights empirically a key theoretical distinction between models ofconnectivity in discourse, and perhaps more importantly, it demonstrates that the moving stanza window methodmakes it possible to use ENA to model both group discourse and the contributions of individuals to the groupwithin a CSCL context.ReferencesArvaja, M., Salovaara, H., Häkkinen, P., & Järvelä, S. (2007). Combining individual and group-level perspectivesfor studying collaborative knowledge construction in context. Learning and Instruction, 17(4), 448-459.Bakhtin, M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays. Trans. Vern W. McGee. University of Texas Press.Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school.National Academy Press.Chi, M. T., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics problems by expertsand novices. Cognitive Science, 5(2), 121-152.ICLS 2016 Proceedings637© ISLSChesler, N. C., Ruis, A. R., Collier, W., Swiecki, Z., Arastoopour, G., & Shaffer, D. W. (2015). A novel paradigmfor engineering education: Virtual internships with individualized mentoring and assessment ofengineering thinking. Journal of biomechanical engineering, 137(2), 024701.Cress, U., & Hesse, F. W. (2013). Quantitative methods for studying small groups. In C. E. Hmelo-Silver, C. A.Chinn, C. K. K. Chan, and A. O’Donnell (Eds.), The international handbook of collaborative learning,(pp. 93-111). Routledge.DiSessa, A. A. (1988). Knowledge in pieces. In G. Forman & P. Pufall (Eds.), Constructivism in the computerage (pp. 47-70). Lawrence Erlbaum Publishers.Dyke, G., Kumar, R., Ai, H., & Rosé, C. P. (2012). Challenging assumptions: Using sliding window visualizationsto reveal time-based irregularities in CSCL processes. In Proceedings of the 10th InternationalConference of the Learning Sciences (Vol. 1, pp. 363-370).Gee, J. P. (1990). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses. Falmer Press.Gernsbacher, M. A. (1991). Cognitive processes and mechanisms in language comprehension: The structurebuilding framework. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation (pp. 217-263).Academic Press.Graesser, A. C., Gernsbacher, M. A., & Goldman, S.R. (1997). Cognition. In T. A. van Dijk (Ed.), Discourse: Amultidisciplinary introduction (pp. 292-319). Sage.Hearst, M. A. (1994). Multi-paragraph segmentation of expository text. In Proceedings of the 32nd annual meetingon Association for Computational Linguistics (pp. 9-16). Association for Computational Linguistics.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Liu, L., & Jordan, R. (2009). Visual Representation of a Multidimensional Coding Schemefor Understanding Technology-Mediated Learning about Complex Natural Systems. Research andPractice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 4(3), 253-280.Rosé, C., Wang, Y. C., Cui, Y., Arguello, J., Stegmann, K., Weinberger, A., & Fischer, F. (2008). Analyzingcollaborative learning processes automatically: Exploiting the advances of computational linguistics incomputer-supported collaborative learning. International Journal of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning, 3(3), 237-271.Shaffer, D. W. (2012). Models of situated action: Computer games and the problem of transfer. In C. Steinkuehler,K. Squire, S. Barab (Eds.), Games learning, and society: Learning and meaning in the digital age, (pp.403-433). Cambridge University Press.Shaffer, D. W. (2014). User guide for Epistemic Network Analysis web version 3.3. Madison, WI: Games andProfessional Simulations Technical Report 2014-1.Shaffer, D. W., & Arastoopour, G. (2014). Guide to RSdata.csv sample ENA data set. Madison, WI: Games andProfessional Simulations Technical Report 2014-3Shaffer, D. W., Hatfield, D., Svarovsky, G., Nash, P., Nulty, A., Bagley, E. A., … Mislevy, R. J. (2009). EpistemicNetwork Analysis: A prototype for 21st century assessment of learning. The International Journal ofLearning and Media, 1(1), 1-21.Smagorinsky, P. (2012). Vygotsky and literacy research: A methodological framework (Vol. 2). Sense Publishers.Stahl, G., Koschmann, T., & Suthers, D. (2006). Computer-supported collaborative learning: An historicalperspective. Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences, (pp. 409-426). Cambridge University Press.Stahl, G. (2009). Studying virtual math teams. Springer Science and Business Media.Suthers, D. D., & Desiato, C. (2012, January). Exposing chat features through analysis of uptake betweencontributions. In 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Science (pp. 3368-3377). IEEE.Webb, N. M. (2009). The teacher's role in promoting collaborative dialogue in the classroom. British Journal ofEducational Psychology, 79(1), 1-28.Wells, G. (1999). Dialogic inquiry: Towards a sociocultural practice and theory of education. Cambridge,England: Cambridge University Press.Wenger, E. (1999). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge University Press.AcknowledgmentsThis work was funded in part by the National Science Foundation (DRL-0918409, DRL-0946372, DRL-1247262,DRL-1418288, DUE-0919347, DUE-1225885, EEC-1232656, EEC-1340402, REC-0347000), the MacArthurFoundation, the Spencer Foundation, the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation, and the Office of the ViceChancellor for Research and Graduate Education at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The opinions, findings,and conclusions do not reflect the views of the funding agencies, cooperating institutions, or other individuals.ICLS 2016 Proceedings638© ISLS