Parents’ Decontextualized Talk During Early Childhood Predictsthe Neural Basis of Narrative Processing in Later ChildhoodÖzlem Ece Demir-Lira, University of Iowa, ecdemir@gmail.comSalomi S. Asaridou, University of California, Irvine, sasarido@uci.eduSusan C. Levine, University of Chicago, s-levine@uchicago.eduSusan Goldin-Meadow, University of Chicago, sgm@uchicago.eduSteven L. Small, University of California, Irvine, small@uci.eduAbstract: Early parental language input strongly predicts children's language development andacademic success. Little is known about relations between early input and the neurobiology oflanguage. Among different measures of input, parents' decontextualized utterances aboutabstract topics predict children's language outcomes more strongly than parental socioeconomicstatus and input quantity. Here, using fMRI, we show that preschool parental language input isassociated with school-aged children recruiting different neurocognitive systems for languageprocessing.IntroductionChildren are expected to converse in academic language once they arrive school. This language is used to tell astory, to make an argument, to comprehend a text, to give a presentation, to integrate information across multiplepassages, etc. (Snow, 2010). Academic language is dense, abstract, and decontextualized. Thus, it presents distinctchallenges from the conversational language that young children are typically exposed to in their daily lives.Other types of linguistic input must help prepare children for the challenges of academic language. We argue thatearly decontextualized language parents provide is just this type of input. Decontextualized language include talkabout the past and future (e.g. Mom is going to go to the foot doctor tomorrow), pretend play talk (e.g. Come onhorsies, gallop back to your stall), and explanations (e.g. Yes, let's turn the blocks so you can see the patterns onthem). Here we ask whether children’s early home environments vary in the opportunities to hear decontextualizedlanguage and, if so, whether parental decontextualized language input predicts the neurocognitive basis ofchildren’s language processing during school years.Prior literature highlights strong relations between environmental factors, specifically parentalsocioeconomic status (SES), and brain structure. However, little is known about how the neurofunctional basisof academic performance varies as a function of environmental factors. Further, SES is a composite construct.Which component of SES is most strongly relates to neural differences is unknown (Hackman & Farah, 2009).Parental input might be a more proximate measure of children’s day-to-day experiences than SES. Here weleveraged a neuroimaging method, fMRI, to provide additional information about the underlying neural processesthat contribute to behavioral performance as children are engaged in a task. Specifically, we asked whether as afunction of early parental decontextualized input, children recruit similar neural systems but with varying degreesof efficiency or they recruit different systems during a decontextualized language task – namely narrativeprocessing.MethodsParticipants. Seventeen typically developing children and their parents participated in the study. Children andparents were drawn from a larger, monolingual sample participating in a longitudinal study of children’s languagedevelopment in the greater Chicago area. Children were 14 months at the time of their first visit, and were visitedin their homes every four months after that point. To be included in the current analysis, the dyad needed to havethe relevant home visit at 30 months and participated in the neuroimaging study at age 7-9 years. The childreninteracted at home with their primary caregiver. The average income for the sample was $59,322 (SD = 3,294).The average years of education for the primary caregiver was 16 (SD = 2) years, corresponding to a Bachelor’sdegree.Behavioral procedure. Parental input measure was based on parent-child interactions. Parents were askedto interact with their children as they normally would, and parent-child dyads were videotaped for a 90 minuteperiod. All parent and child speech in the videotaped session at child age 30 months was transcribed (percentagreement 95%). Decontextualized language utterances produced by parents and children were identified (percentagreement 96%, Cohen’s kappa 0.73). All utterances that were not coded as decontextualized were consideredcontextualized.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1767© ISLSNeuroimaging procedure. Neuroimaging measures were collected when children entered school. Whenchildren were 7-9 years old, we administered a narrative comprehension task in a scanner using fMRI. Childrenpassively viewed a storyteller narrating a story. When children came out of the scanner, they were askedcomprehension questions about the stories they heard. Using partial least squares analysis (McIntosh & Lobaugh,2004), we examined which brain networks show activation that covaries with early parental decontextualizedinput at the whole brain level.ResultsWe found two networks in the brain that were related to the decontextualized input children received. The firstnetwork was positively related to input - that is the higher was the amount of decontextualized talk childrenreceived at 2.5 years of age, the higher was the recruitment of bilateral middle and superior temporal cortices(LV1, p = .02, Figure 1a). The second network was negatively related to input - the lower was the amount ofdecontextualized input, the higher was the recruitment of bilateral superior/inferior parietal, premotor cortices,and angular gyrus (LV1, p = .02, Figure 1b. No significant relations between neural activation in these clustersand parental SES or contextualized input were observed (p > .10). Parental input did not correlate withperformance on comprehension questions (p > .10).Figure 1. a) Brain networks that show a positive correlation (red) with parental decontextualized input. Thesingular image showing reliable clusters was mapped to the atlas and thresholded to show bootstrap ratios ≥ |+/3| and number of nodes over 20. Scatterplot shows the relation between input and average signal intensity at thepeak voxel of the network. b) Brain networks that show a negative correlation (blue) with parentaldecontextualized input. The singular image showing reliable clusters was mapped to the atlas and thresholded toshow bootstrap ratios ≥ |+/-3| and number of nodes over 20. Scatterplot shows the relation between input andaverage signal intensity at the peak voxel of the network.DiscussionPrior work established relations between parental SES and brain structures. However, not much is known aboutthe relations between environmental factors and the neurofunctional basis of children’s academic performance.Further, which aspect of SES most strongly predicts differences in brain function is also not known. We focusedon parental language input and its relations to neural basis of narrative processing. In narrative processing,temporal areas are involved in verbal, semantic processing, whereas the parietal regions are involved in visuospatial mental building. Although correlational, results suggest that children respond adaptively to their earlyenvironments by relying on different neural systems to succeed at narrative processing. Our results suggested thatchildren who are exposed to decontextualized language to a greater degree early in life rely on verbal, semanticnetworks in narrative processing, whereas children who heard decontextualized input to a lesser extent recruitedvisuospatial networks instead. Importantly, the two groups did not show behavioral differences. Althoughneuroscience’s role in education research remains highly debated, we show that neuroimaging methods has thepotential to reveal whether children might reveal different systems in the brain even when their behavioralperformance is the same. This finding might have implications for interventions aiming to close the achievementgap. Children might need interventions that target different neural systems depending on input history.ReferencesHackman, D. A., & Farah, M. J. (2009). Socioeconomic status and the developing brain. Trends in CognitiveSciences, 13(2), 65-73.McIntosh, A. R., & Lobaugh, N. J. (2004). Partial least squares analysis of neuroimaging data: applications andadvances. Neuroimage, 23, S250-S263.Snow, C. E. (2010). Academic language and the challenge of reading for learning. Science, 328(5977), 450-452.1768