Validating a Model for Assessing Teacher’s Adaptive ExpertiseWith Computer Supported Complex Systems Curricula and ItsRelationship to Student Learning OutcomesSusan A. Yoon, Jessica Koehler-Yom, Emma Anderson, and Chad Evansyoonsa@upenn.edu, jkoehl@gse.upenn.edu, emmaa@gse.upenn.edu, echad@sas.upenn.eduUniversity of PennsylvaniaAbstract: The success of the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) and similar reformsis contingent upon the quality of teaching, yet the shifts in teaching practice required aresubstantial. In this study, we propose and validate a model of adaptive expertise needed forteachers to successfully deliver NGSS-informed computer supported complex systems curriculain high school science classrooms. The model is comprised of three research-based qualitiesthat we hypothesize teachers need to demonstrate: flexibility, deeper level understanding, anddeliberate practice, in adapting interventions to their particular teaching contexts. We apply themodel to understand whether it can, a) show variation between teachers, and b) predict studentlearning outcomes. Results show that teacher enactments and interview responses assessed onthe model reveal sufficient variation, and are also predictive of students’ growth in complexsystems understanding. The model has important implications for how to support teachers inadopting new science education reforms.Keywords: teacher’s adaptive expertise, computer supported curricula, complex systems, NGSSIntroductionThe recently released Next Generation Sciences Standards (NGSS) in the US provides a vision for scienceeducation reform that includes greater emphasis on constructing scientific models, using computational learningsupports, and understanding systems and system interactions. The success of the NGSS and similar reforms iscontingent upon the quality of teaching, yet the shifts in teaching practice required are substantial (Reiser, 2013;Wilson, 2013). It is also widely known that situational issues like lack of adequate resources, and few high qualityprofessional development (PD) opportunities make adopting reforms challenging (Blandford, 2012; CalabreseBarton, 2007). Furthermore, given the complex nature of science teaching (Wilson, 2013), the extent to whichteachers are able to adapt their practice and demonstrate expertise is likely to influence the success of curricularreform adoption and implementation.With respect to teacher expertise, recent literature has broadened the stance on high quality teaching toinclude the effect of context on teaching and learning where previous conceptions of expertise, particularly inscience, focused mainly on improving teacher’s content and pedagogical content knowledge (Kennedy, 2010;National Research Council, 2011; National Science Board, 2010). This supports an expanded notion of expertteaching that includes not only teachers’ human capital, but also how teachers navigate the complex and situatednature of teaching (Lin, Schwartz, & Hatano, 2005; Rozenszajn & Yarden, 2013) also known as adaptive expertise(Crawford et al., 2005; De Arment, Reed, & Wetzel, 2013; Hammerness et al., 2007).While there is substantial theoretical literature on teachers’ adaptive expertise, there is a need forempirical evidence illustrating specifically what adaptive expert teaching looks like and whether it promotesimproved student-learning outcomes (Janssen et al., 2015; Soslau, 2012). In previous research, we conducted casestudies of what adaptive expert teaching looks like when working with computer-supported complex systemscurricula defining three essential characteristics: flexibility, deeper level understanding, and deliberate practice(Yoon et al., 2015b). The goal of this current study is to validate the proposed model of teacher adaptive expertisewith a larger sample of 10 high school science teachers and to test whether the model is predictive of studentlearning of complex systems content with 351 students. If the model is robust, we should be able to see significantvariation in teacher’s adaptive expertise enactments. Thus, the first question guiding our research is, “Does themodel differentiate between teachers’ levels of adaptive expertise?” Likewise, if the hypothesis that teachers, whohave higher levels of adaptive expertise, are better able to adopt and implement reforms, is correct, we should beable to see improved student learning in the classrooms of those teachers. Thus, the second question guiding ourresearch is, “Do levels of teachers’ adaptive expertise predict levels of student learning in the target area ofreform?” In the following section we briefly review literature on teachers’ adaptive expertise and outline theconceptual framework we used to measure it.ICLS 2016 Proceedings106© ISLSTeachers’ adaptive expertise for complex systems teaching and learningHigh school science teachers are expected to have extensive knowledge of their subject matter, but research hasexplored how the complex context in which teaching occurs influences student learning in addition to subjectmatter knowledge (Penuel et al., 2011). From this perspective, pedagogical content knowledge is considered toextend far beyond a teacher’s grasp of the subject or training in pedagogy and classroom management. Recentliterature defines teachers’ pedagogical content knowledge as “teachers’ understanding of how to help a group ofstudents understand specific subject matter while using multiple instructional strategies, representations andassessments…working within the contextual, cultural and social limitations in the learning environment”(Nilsson, 2014; p. 1795). Some researchers assert that there is not a single definition of expert teaching, and thatthe value of teachers’ knowledge is context dependent (e.g., Van Driel & Berry, 2012). However, in order tooperationalize teaching expertise, we need a way to evaluate expert practice when we see it.To investigate this, we turn to the study of expertise in the learning sciences (e.g., Bereiter &Scardamalia, 1993) and teaching (e.g., Berliner, 2001). In our previous research, we outlined what expertise mightlook like and how it can be developed with new or reform-oriented curricula and instruction (Yoon et al., 2015b)carefully examining the practice of three teachers. We constructed a model of important characteristics of teacheradaptive expertise based on literature briefly reviewed below.How performance on novel problems can be enhanced has been characterized as adaptive expertise(Barnett & Koslowski, 2002; Hatano, 1982; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1993). The complex nature of teachingrequires teachers to be able to orchestrate myriad variables, see multiple perspectives, and identify problems andpossibilities in existing and emergent situations (Bransford et al., 2005; Fairbanks et al., 2010). As adaptiveexperts, teachers deal with non-routine events, and seek to extend their capabilities always working at the edge oftheir competence. In this way, as Bereiter and Scardamalia (1993) suggest, expertise should be understood as aprocess rather than a state, which is by nature action oriented and therefore can be observed as it is enacted.A review of the literature reveals three important characteristics with respect to actions associated withexpertise, i.e., flexibility, ability to demonstrate deeper level understanding, and deliberate practice. Flexibility ischaracterized by the ability to opportunistically plan, change enactments faster than non-experts, and flexibly andcritically apply their knowledge to new situations while constantly learning (Berliner, 2001; Bransford et al.,1999; Chi, 2011; Ferrari, 2002). Flexibility is also manifested in teachers’ abilities to integrate aspects of teacherknowledge in relation to the teaching act while responding to their specific contexts (Tsui, 2009). Deeper levelunderstanding is associated with one’s ability to recognize meaningful patterns quickly, allowing one to attend todeeper level problem solving and in turn perform at a higher level (Berliner, 2001; Bransford, 1999; Ericsson etal., 2006; Ferrari, 2002; Hammerness et al., 2005; Levy & Murnane, 2004). Deliberate practice is manifested inone’s ability to engage in reflection and conscious deliberation. Experts who demonstrate deliberate practice arehighly motivated, self-regulated, and constantly seek to improve performance by identifying problems, addressingthem, and finding new problems to work on (Bereiter & Scardamalia 1993; Berliner, 2001; Tsui, 2009).In Yoon et al. (2015b), we found that the three teachers varied in these characteristics and that thevariations appeared to influence the success of the implementation of project activities based in teaching andlearning of complex systems. In this study, we aim to validate the model with a larger sample of teachers. We seethis as an efficacy study testing the model with a different population, where the previous pilot work would becategorized as design and development research using the Common Guidelines for Education Research andDevelopment (IES/NSF, 2013). Such progressions of research are necessary to ensure high quality evidence,meaningful findings, and actionable results through the systematic development of knowledge (IES/NSF, 2013).Before moving onto the study, we briefly describe complex systems and instruction that is best supported throughcomputer simulations (Yoon et al., 2015a).Complex systems are found in myriad natural and social phenomena. While definitions of complexsystems vary based on discipline, central features include multiple interacting variables that form patternsdiscernable over time fueled by dynamic processes (Yoon, 2011). For example, ecological systems are made upof different trophic levels (e.g., producers and consumers) whereby through predator-prey interactions, energyflows through the system optimally existing in states of equilibrium (e.g., stable producer and consumerpopulations). System states fluctuate often by hidden variables (e.g., random mutations) at micro levels that areonly observable over time at larger scales (a process known as emergence). Therefore, complex systemsresearchers use computer simulations to assist in modeling system evolution to investigate as well as to makepredictions of future states (e.g., how drought patterns affect food webs).MethodsICLS 2016 Proceedings107© ISLSContextThis study is part of a larger project aimed at building students’ and teachers’ understanding of biology contentand instructional practices through exploring computational models of complex systems. For training on theintervention, teachers participated in a weeklong 30–hour summer PD workshop and follow-up Saturdayworkshops during the school year (approximately two workshops per semester totaling 10 hours) between 2012and 2013. PD activities included hands-on training in five biology units on the topics of Genetics, Evolution,Ecology, the Human Body, and Animal Systems. The units entail working with the agent-based simulations thatcombine graphical blocks-based programming with a 3-D game-like interface. The units also include workingthrough experiments that provide experiences in core scientific practices as outlined in the NGSS, such asanalyzing and interpreting data, engaging in argument from evidence, and obtaining, evaluating andcommunicating information There is no set sequence for the units; instead, teachers can implement the units inthe order that suits their school curriculum. The curricular materials for each unit take 2 to 3 days to complete andinclude popular and academic literature about complex systems as well as short movies, PowerPoint presentations,and teacher and student activity guides.PD activities also included training in complex systems structures and processes, such as feedback,interdependence, self-organization, and emergence, as well as activities that specified where the units fit into thehigh school biology curriculum. During the school year, teachers implemented the units in their biology classes.ParticipantsWe recruited 10 teachers—seven women and three men—from eight Boston-area public schools. The teacherscame from a diverse set of schools. One school was as high as 75% ethnic/racial minorities, while another schoolwas almost entirely White (3% minority). School-level percentages of low-income students ranged fromapproximately 14% to 80%. The percentage of students considered proficient or advanced on the statestandardized science test ranged from 45 to 93. Teachers, on average, had 8.5 years of teaching experience, witha range of 3.5 to 19 years.We collected student data in 10 classrooms drawn from 8 schools and a total of 351 students. The schoolsdid not release individual student demographic and achievement data to us, so we cannot report accurate sampledata in these areas. However, due to the range of classrooms, we believe that the students we worked with are arelatively representative sample of the population-level statistics that are reported. Table 1 provides furtherdemographic details of the student population.Table 1: School Level Demographic DataSchool ID% LowIncome136.0279.6359.0427.7518.0614.8714.28NATotals35.6*Minority defined as non-whiteSchool-Level Characteristics% Above Proficient onState Assessment714563659389827873.3%% Minority*NA75.370.540.236.230.53.625.540.3Data sourcesTo see how teachers varied in their enactments of teachers’ adaptive expertise, we analyzed classroomobservations, year-end teacher interviews, teacher reflections of each unit implementation, and researcher focusgroup interviews. For the classroom observations, teachers and students were observed at least twice during theschool year by research staff. The observation protocol required attention to details about how teachers andstudents worked with the simulations, how teachers facilitated learning with the curricular materials, and howteachers scaffolded student understanding of complex systems. Teacher interviews and reflections probedteacher’s ideas about challenges in implementation and how they overcame them with particular focus on contextvariables such as student abilities, and resource availability. At the end of the year, a focus group interview wasICLS 2016 Proceedings108© ISLSalso held with the research staff who observed in teacher’s classrooms to capture more formal and anecdotalinformation about the content of their communication with teachers between observations, and generalimpressions of teacher’s relative abilities to teach using intervention activities.To determine student understanding of complex systems, two open-ended questions were administeredbefore and after the intervention that provided scenarios on the topics of ecology and evolution. The scenarios arepresented below.Ecology ScenarioImagine a flock of geese arriving in a park in Boston, where geese haven’t lived before. Describehow the addition of these geese to the park affects the ecosystem over time. Consider both theliving and non-living parts of the ecosystem.Evolution ScenarioSome mosquitoes no longer die when DDT (a powerful chemical used to kill insects) is sprayedon them, while others do. Many years ago, DDT worked to kill almost all mosquitoes. Howwould biologists explain why some mosquitoes do not die anymore when DDT is sprayed onthem?AnalysisTo analyze teacher’s adaptive expertise enactments, the interview transcripts and recorded reflections andclassroom observations were mined and coded for levels of enactments based on the categorization manual foundin Table 2. The manual was first constructed and validated for the previous study (Yoon et al., 2015b) byresearchers on the project team (authors 1–3) with only low and high enactments specified. For this study, wemodified the manual to include enactments that were determined to fall in the middle range to provide a greaterrange. Two researchers external to the project were trained on the manual with 20% of the data yielding aninterrater reliability alpha score of .75. The full data set was then scored by the authors. Discrepant or uncertainenactments were negotiated and given a single code. The highest score a teacher could receive in each categorywas 3 with a total combined adaptive expertise score of up to 9. We ran an analysis of variance (ANOVA) withthe complete data set to see whether there was sufficient variation between teachers.Table 2: Categorization Manual for Teachers’ Adaptive ExpertiseCategory and DefinitionFlexibility• Ability to incorporate project activities intotheir daily practice.• Awareness of their student population andtheir needs• Awareness of the school context• Ability to respond to unexpected issues thatarise• Able to adapt their practice by being able toincorporate project expectations in theirsituated context.ExamplesHigh: Teacher ran the simulation on the smartboard from hiscomputer as students worked on their own so he could pointthings out and they could follow along.Medium: Teacher instructs the students that when they get to[argumentation], they need to stop and talk with another groupand they should turn off their monitors when they are ready todiscuss.Low: Teacher informed us that 17 of the 30 students in thisclass were failing. He had also NOT prepped the students at allin terms of introducing them to the simulation environmentbeforehand. I don’t think he reviewed the evolution conceptsbeforehand either.High: Teacher introduces complex systems. Talks aboutDeeper level of understanding• Actions of the teacher that demonstrate their agents that follow certain rules. Talks about intestines andability to go beyond what they are required about phospholipid bilayer.Medium: Teacher told the students who finished early toto do with the project.“mess with what you’ve done.” The students were able to• Are able to implement extensions or makecreate their own mini experiments by changing one of theconnections that build or address deeperlevel of knowledge construction or problem variables in the model. This kept the group engaged whilewaiting for slower students. This also allowed the studentssolving.• Bring in variation from outside the present space to explore and ask new questions.Low: From here on, the teacher is completely hands-off. It issystem of activityclear some students are very confused and don’t know whereto start.ICLS 2016 Proceedings109© ISLSDeliberate practice• Actions of the teacher that demonstrate theirability to show motivation, focus, andrepeated effort to monitor their practice,• Devise and subsequently attempt newapproaches to improve implementation• Teachers exhibit explicit evidence ofreflecting on a problem and how to improve.High: After some readjustment from Day 1 between teacher A& teacher B, teacher B determined they could split the laptopcart and she could use laptops in the room – this was a bigadvantage.Medium: Teacher was surprised in the first class that thestudents didn’t “fly though it” and make it through the wholeactivity. He said that he could have prepared a bit betterLow: In debrief with the teacher: He did not prepare hisstudents at all before implementing the evolution activity. Heseemed to think it ‘went OK’ and again reiterated that thisgroup of students was a tough groupStudent responses to the open-ended question were scored on a three-point scale from (1) clockwork thinking(non-complex) to (3) complex thinking in four categories: predictability, processes, order, and emergence andscale. Table 3 shows a shortened version of the categorization manual which has been validated in previousstudies, e.g., Yoon et al., 2015a; Yoon et al., forthcoming). We ran a regression analysis to see whether teachers’adaptive expertise scores were predictive of students’ complex systems scores.Table 3: Categorization Manual for Student’s Complex Systems UnderstandingComplexSystemsComponentsDescriptionsPredictability The emphasis is on the predictability of the effects caused by the agent in question. According to theclockwork framework, the way in which a part or agent operates or affects other components of thesystem is predictable. In a complex framework, it is impossible to anticipate precisely the behavior ofthe system. This is because the actions of agents cannot be predicted (as random forces or chancefactors can affect an agent’s actions) even if we know the rules or characteristics of the agent.Processes Processes refer to the dynamism of the mechanisms that underlie the phenomena (i.e., how the systemworks or is thought to work_. In a clockwork framework, there is a beginning, middle, and end in thesystem. The system is composed of static events. While perturbations (actions by/on parts) in thesystem may cause change to occur, the change terminates once an outcome is achieved. In a complexsystems framework, there is no definite beginning and end to the activity. System processes areongoing and dynamic.Order The focus is the organization of the system or phenomenon as centralized or decentralized. Aclockwork framework assumes that all systems are controlled by a central agent (e.g., all action isdictated by a leader). Order is established top-down or determined with a specific purpose in mind. Ina complex systems framework, control is decentralized and distributed to multiple parts or agents.Order in the system is self-organized or ‘bottom-up’ and emerges spontaneously.Emergence Emergence refers to the phenomenon where the complex entity manifests properties that exceed theand Scale summed traits and capacities of individual components (Davis & Sumara, 2006). In other words, thesecomplex patterns simply emerge from the simpler, interdependent interactions among the components(Capra, 1996). In a clockwork framework, parts of the system are perceived to be isolated with littleinterdependency among them. This is because of the linear nature that characterizes theserelationships. Thus, there are no large, global patterns that emerge from actions imposed on thesystem. Rather, these actions cause only localized changes (e.g., geese eat plants causes a decrease ingrass). In a complex system, because parts or agents are interdependent in multiple ways, an action(small or large) that is imposed on the system may have large and far-reaching consequences on thenumerous parts and agents of the system. This may in turn result in large-scale change and evolution.FindingsTeacher adaptive expertise combined scores ranged from 3.67 to 7.65 out of a possible score of 9 (see Table 4).The mean adaptive expertise was 6.18 with a standard deviation of 1.01. To determine whether there weremeaningful differences in adaptive expertise between teachers, we conducted an ANOVA of the teachers’adaptive expertise item scorings (See Table 5). From these results (F (9, 362) = 15.07, p <0.001), we concludethat the teachers in our sample differed significantly in their adaptive expertise.ICLS 2016 Proceedings110© ISLSTable 4: Adaptive Expertise Scores by Category for Each TeacherTeacherFlexibility123456789102.251.152.652.061.672.062.502.211.922.22DeeperUnderstanding2.171.182.591.791.431.792.132.181.102.04DeliberatePractice2.001.332.422.202.432.362.002.622.672.67OverallExpertise6.423.677.656.045.536.216.637.025.696.93Table 5: Analysis of Variance of Teacher Adaptive Expertise Item ScoringsTo test whether teachers’ adaptive expertise scores were predictive of student understanding of complex systems,regressions were run holding student pre-scores constant. The first regression examined student complex systemunderstanding in ecology and the second regression examined student complex system understanding in evolution.Table 6 shows results for ecology (F (2, 350)= 22.13, p<0.001). For each one-unit increase in teacher combinedAE rating, there was an increase of 0.94 points in student performance on the ecology question. Table 7 showsthe results for evolution (F (2, 295) = 28.64, p<0.001). Here, student scores were 1.24 points higher for each oneunit increase in their teacher’s combined AE rating. Both of these analyses led us to the same conclusion: adaptiveexpertise is significantly related to student achievement in complex systems.Table 6: Regression Assessing the Relationship Between Student Complex Systems Understanding of Ecologyand Teacher Adaptive ExpertiseTable 7: Regression Assessing the Relationship Between Student Complex Systems Understanding of Evolutionand Teacher Adaptive ExpertiseConclusions and implicationsOur findings provide a model of the qualities important in defining teachers’ adaptive expertise and what it lookslike in the classroom with computer supported complex systems curricula. Furthermore, as we have found themodel to demonstrate sufficient variation among teachers and to be predictive of student learning, this studyprovides important empirical evidence to the research on teachers’ adaptive expertise (Janssen et al., 2015; Soslau,ICLS 2016 Proceedings111© ISLS2012). We believe that using an adaptive expertise model helps professional developers and researchers interestedin learning how to train teachers to teach with complex systems resources and approaches by illustrating the rangeof contextualized classroom enactments. As Fairbanks et al. (2010) and other researchers suggest, the complexnature of teaching requires the orchestration of many variables and responses to emergent situations that oftencannot be predicted a priori.We are aware of the limitations of the study in that the sample was small and self-selected therefore wecan make no generalizability of claims. We do believe, however, that this efficacy research provides evidence ofthe support of such an adaptive expertise model for teachers in line with developing systematic knowledge thatcan eventually be scaled (IES/NSF, 2013). Furthermore, as Wilson (2013) notes, it is rare to be able to linklearning directly to teacher practices. These findings provide promising evidence in support of a larger scale effortto develop teachers’ adaptive expertise to ensure adoption and high quality implementation of curriculum andinstruction based in the NGSS.ReferencesYoon, S., Anderson, E., Koehler-Yom, Evans, C., Park, M., J., Sheldon, J., Schoenfeld, I., Wendel, D.,Scheintaub, H., Klopfer, E. (forthcoming). Teaching about complex systems is not simple matter:Building effective professional development for computer-supported complex systems instruction.Instructional Science.Yoon, S., Anderson, E., Koehler-Yom, J., Sheldon, J., Schoenfeld, I., Wendel, D., Scheintaub, H., Klopfer, E.,Oztok, M., & Evans, C. (2015a). Design features for computer-supported complex systems learning andteaching in high school science classrooms. Journal of Research in STEM Education, 1(1), 17-30.Yoon, S., Koehler-Yom, J., Anderson, E., Lin, J., & Klopfer, E. (2015b). Using an adaptive expertise lensto understand the quality of teachers’ classroom implementation of computer-supported complexsystems curricula in high school science. Research in Science and Technology Education, 33(2),237-251.Yoon, S. A. (2011). Using social network graphs as visualization tools to influence peer selection decisionmaking strategies to access information about complex socioscientific issues. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 20(4), 549-588.Blandford, S. (2012). Managing professional development in schools. New York: Routledge.Bransford, J.D., Brown, A.L., & Cocking, R.R. (1999). How experts differ from novices. In Bransford, J.D.,Brown, A.L., & Cocking, R.R. (Eds.). How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and School (pp. 1938). Washington DC: National Academy Press.Bransford, J., Darling-Hammond, L., & LePage, P. (2005). Introduction. In L. Darling-Hammond & J. Bransford(Eds.), Preparing Teachers for a Changing World: What Teachers ShouldLlearn and be Able to do (pp.1-39). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Barnett, S. M. & Koslowski, B. (2002). Adaptive expertise: effects of type of experience and the level oftheoretical understanding it generates. Thinking & Reasoning, 8(4), 237-267.Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1993). Surpassing ourselves: An inquiry into the nature and implications ofexpertise. Illinois: Open Court.Berliner, D. C. (2001). Learning about and from expert teachers. International Journal of Educational Research,35, 463-482.Calabrese Barton, A. (2007). Science learning’s in urban settings. In Abell, A. K., & Lederman, N. (Eds.),Handbook of Research on Science Education (319-343). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum Associates,Publishers.Crawford, V. M., Schlager, M., Toyama, Y., Riel, M., & Vahey, P. (2005). Characterizing adaptive expertise inscience teaching. Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association AnnualConference, April 11–15, 2005, Montreal, Canada.Chi, T. (2011). Theoretical perspectives, methodological approaches, and trends in the study of expertise. In Y.Li and G. Kaiser (Eds.), Expertise in mathematics instruction: An international perspective (pp. 19-39).New York: Springer.Davis, B., & Sumara, D. J. (2006). Complexity and education: Inquiries into learning, teaching, and research.Psychology Press: Mahwah, NJDe Arment, S. T., Reed, E., & Wetzel, A. P. (2013a). ePortfolios: Promoting special education adaptive expertisethrough reflection in a web-based learning community. International Journal of ePortfolio 3(2), 149160.De Arment, S. T., Reed, E., & Wetzel, A. P. (2013b). Promoting adaptive expertise: a conceptual framework forspecial educator preparation. Teacher Education and Special Education: The Journal of the TeacherICLS 2016 Proceedings112© ISLSDesimone, L. M. (2009). Improving impact studies of teachers' professional development: Toward betterconceptualizations and measures. Educational Researcher 38(3), 181-199.Ericsson, KA., Charness, N., Feltovich, P.J., Hoffman, R.R. (2006). The Cambridge handbook of expertise andexpert performance. New York: Cambridge University Press.Fairbanks, C.M., Duffy, G.G., Faircloth, B.S., He, Y., Levin, B. et al. (2010). Beyond knowledge: Exploring whysome teachers are more thoughtfully adaptive than others. Journal of Teacher Education, 61(1-2), 161171.Ferrari, M. (2002). The pursuit of excellence through education. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Hammerness, K., Darling-Hammond, L., Bransford, J., Berliner, D., Corchan-Smith, M., McDonald, M., &Zeichner, K. (2007). How teachers learn and develop. In Darling-Hammond, L., & Bransford, J. (Eds.),Preparing Teachers for a Changing World: What Teachers Should Learn and Be Able to Do (358-389).Hoboken, NJ: Jossey-BassHatano, G. (1982). Cognitive consequences of practice in culture specific procedural skills. The QuarterlyNewsletter of the Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition, 4(1), 15-18.Ho, A. D., Chuang, I., Reich, J., Coleman, C., Whitehill, J., Northcutt, C., Williams, J. J., Hansen, J., Lopez, G.,& Petersen, R. (2015). HarvardX and MITx: Two years of open online courses. HarvardX WorkingPaper No. 10.IES/NSF (2013). Common guidelines for education research and development: A report from the Institute ofEducation Sciences, U.S. Department of Education and the National Science Foundation. Authors:Washington D.C.Janssen, F., Grossman, P., & Westbroek, H. (2015). Facilitating decomposition and recomposition in practicebased teacher education: The power of modularity. Teaching and Teacher Education, 51, 137-146.Kennedy, M. M. (2010). Attribution error and the quest for teacher quality. Educational Researcher, 39(8), 591598.Levy, F., & Murnane, R. (2004). Expert thinking in the new division of labor: How computers are creating thenext job market. NY: Princeton University Press.Lin, X., Schwartz, D.L., & Hatano, G. (2005) Toward teachers' adaptive metacognition, Educational Psychologist,40(4), 245-255.Lin, X., Schwartz, D., & Bransford, J. (2007). Intercultural adaptive expertise: Explicit and implicit lessons fromDr. Hatano. Human Development, 50, 65-72.National Research Council. (2011). Successful K–12 STEM education: Identifying effective approaches in science,technology, engineering, and mathematics. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.National Science Board. (2010). Preparing the next generation of STEM innovators: Identifying and developingour nation’s human capital. Washington, DC: National Science Foundation.Nilsson, P. (2014). When teaching makes a difference: Developing science teachers’ pedagogical contentknowledge through learning study. International Journal of Science Education, 36(11), 1794-1814.Penuel, W.R., Fishman, B.J., Haugan Cheng, B., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development atthe intersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331-337.Reiser, B., J. (2013). What professional development strategies are needed for successful implementation of thenext generation science standards? Invitational Research Symposium on Science Assessment.Rozenszajn, R. & Yarden, A. (2013). Expansion of biology teachers’ pedagogical content knowledge (PCK)during a long-term professional development program. Research in Science Education, 44, 189-213.Soslau, E. (2012). Opportunities to develop adaptive teaching expertise during supervisory conferences. Teachingand Teacher Education, 28, 768-779.Tsui A.B.M. (2009). Distinctive qualities of expert teachers. Teachers and Teaching: Theory and Practice, 15(4),421-439.Van Driel, J.H., & Berry, A. (2012). Teacher professional development focusing on pedagogical contentknowledge. Educational Researcher, 41(1), 26-28.Wilson, S. M. (2013). Professional development for science teachers. Science, 340, 310-313.AcknowledgmentsWe thank Eric Klopfer, Josh Sheldon, Ilana Schoenfeld, Daniel Wendel, and Hal Scheintaub for theircollaboration on the project. This work was funded by the U.S. National Science Foundation Discovery ResearchK–12 (DRL 1019228).ICLS 2016 Proceedings113© ISLS