Qualitative and Quantitative Information in Cognitive GroupAwareness Tools: Impact on Collaborative LearningMelanie Erkens, Patrick Schlottbom, Daniel Bodemermelanie.erkens@uni-due.de, patrick.schlottbom@stud.uni-due.de, daniel.bodemer@uni-due.deUniversity of Duisburg-EssenAbstract: A large body of research covers the positive impact of cognitive group awarenesstools on collaborative learning processes. These tools provide learners with visualizations ofrelevant cognitive information on their learning partners, triggering the resolution of cognitiveconflicts, improving accurate partner modeling and, associated therewith, implicitly guidinglearners’ activities instead of prescribing certain ways of behaving. Said visualizations can bedifferentiated by the type of awareness information they provide: qualitative or quantitative. Wesystematically compared the impact of both types of information on collaborative learning inan experimental study (N = 51). The results suggest that the availability of both qualitative andquantitative information can evoke cognitive conflicts that guide learners’ communicationbehavior in a goal-oriented way. Furthermore, visualizations combining both types ofinformation appear to facilitate accurate partner modeling.IntroductionA large body of research covers the positive impact of cognitive group awareness tools on collaborative learningprocesses (cf. Janssen & Bodemer, 2013). Such tools support learners by providing them with relevant cognitiveinformation on their teammates' knowledge (Janssen & Bodemer, 2013) and implicitly guiding them through thelearning process, the latter meaning that the tools suggest certain ways of thinking, communicating and behavinginstead of prescribing them (Bodemer, 2011). This enables the learners to (self-)regulate their learning withreference to learning mechanisms being central to collaborative learning, e.g., conflict and partner modeling(Dillenbourg, 1999). Although research on existing tools suggests a strong effect of such tools’ visualizations onlearning behavior and outcomes, the various types of visualized information, namely qualitative or quantitativeinformation, have not been investigated separately so far. Thus, we aim to systematically investigate the impactof both types of visualizations on collaborative learning to better understand their degree of efficiency and getclues on how to design even better cognitive group awareness tools in the future.Cognitive group awareness tools are characterized by its main function of transforming cognitiveinformation, e.g., by categorizing or aggregating ratings on knowledge, and visualizing it (cf. Bodemer & Buder,2006). In so doing, they differ in the types of cognitive information they provide: Some tools visualize what alearner knows about various concepts in comparison to another learner (e.g., Schnaubert & Bodemer, 2015;Dehler, Bodemer, Buder, & Hesse, 2011; Engelmann & Hesse, 2010), and other tools visualize how much thelearning partner knows or rather combine both information in one knowledge representation (e.g., Erkens &Bodemer, 2015; Sangin, Molinari, Nüssli, & Dillenbourg, 2011). By focusing on the functions of theaforementioned cognitive group awareness tools, we can differentiate between qualitative and quantitativeinformation. Qualitative cognitive information provides binary categories of knowledge distributed acrossconcepts, i.e., whether or not knowledge on a specific concept is present. In contrast, quantitative informationdescribes quantitative values that represent the extent of knowledge. Both can also be combined so that the learnerscan be aware of how much they know about each concept belonging to a topic. Such information can be visualizedfor one or several learning partner(s), usually including the learners themselves to simplify the comparisonbetween teammates, allowing goal-oriented collaboration (Bromme, Hesse, & Spada, 2005).Comparability between learning partners is an important factor in this context, since it is associated withrelevant learning mechanisms such as partner modeling and conflict. The concept of conflict goes back to Piaget(1977) and is based on his idea that interactions with physical or social environments can lead to a disequilibrium.In the case of social environments contradicting the knowledge of a learner, intrapersonal (Piaget & Inhelder,1969) or interpersonal cognitive conflicts (Doise & Mugny, 1984) might occur. Cognitive development is makingprogress when learners find cognitive balance through assimilation or accommodation (Piaget, 1977). Both typesof cognitive conflict are regarded as important antecedents to individual learning (Buder, Schwind, Rudat, &Bodemer, 2015). Furthermore, it is assumed that learners maintain a model of their learning partners from whichthey can infer and internalize their knowledge (Dillenbourg, 1999). From a Vygotskian perspective,internalization of socially regulated and mediated knowledge is the motor of cognitive development taking placewhen a layperson interacts with a more capable partner (Tudge & Rogoff, 1989).ICLS 2016 Proceedings458© ISLSCognitive group awareness tools aim to facilitate the comparison between learning partners byvisualizing or highlighting conflicts between them and making conflictual situations more salient (Bodemer,2011). From a Piagetian perspective, comparative visualizations draw one’s attention to knowledge gapstriggering intrapersonal conflicts or to contradicting knowledge that appears to trigger interpersonal conflicts—both of which need to be resolved. Intrapersonal conflicts can support collaborative learning, since knowing aboutshared and unshared knowledge resources triggers discussions about topics, with which only one learner in agroup is familiar (Schittekatte & Van Hiel, 1996). Dehler and colleagues (2011) further found that thevisualization of binary qualitative information on topical knowledge (present or not) guides the communicationbetween learning partners. Learners who were aware that they did not comprehend a text paragraph, independentof the learning partner’s knowledge of the paragraph, asked more questions than learners with visualizedknowledge on the topic. When deficits of partners were visualized, learners also gave more explanations,irrespective of whether a learner knew something about the topic or not (Dehler et al., 2011). Thus, the groupawareness tool used in this study guided learning behavior in so far as learners asked their partners for help oroffered their help to ignorant peers. Furthermore, Sangin and colleagues (2011) showed that visualized differencesof knowledge can guide students not only in their behavior, but also improve their learning outcomes. Discoveringgaps in their knowledge through the comparison of quantity of knowledge (percentage) per learning module(providing peers’ prior knowledge in a collaborative concept mapping phase) motivated students to converge totheir partner’s better knowledge status as the students achieved better learning outcomes than unaware learnersafter the collaboration. Since the different tools mentioned previously have used qualitative information (Dehleret al., 2011) or combined qualitative with quantitative information (Sangin et al., 2011), we assume that theavailability of both types of information can increase the number of content-related questions and explanations(including an explorative investigation of possible interaction effects).Hypothesis 1:Hypothesis 2:Learners supported by qualitative and/or quantitative cognitive information ask morequestions than learners without such support.Learners supported by qualitative and/or quantitative cognitive information explainmore than learners without such support.Concerning partner modeling, the relevance of reducing the effort for grounding processes incollaborative learning was highlighted (Bodemer, 2011). Bodemer (2011) found that learners with groupawareness support spent less time for grounding and modeling processes and were more involved in meaningfuldiscussions than those without support. Sangin and colleagues (2011) further confirmed that the aforementionedincrease of learning outcome depends on the positive impact of partner modeling. With the visualization ofobjective cues on their peers’ prior knowledge, learners became more accurate in estimating their partner’sknowledge, and this accuracy predicted higher learning outcomes (Sangin et al., 2011). Since the latter toolprovides qualitative and quantitative awareness information, or rather more comprehensive information than theother visualizations, this leads us finally to the following assumption:Hypothesis 3a:Hypothesis 3b:Learners supported by a combination of qualitative and quantitative informationestimate their partners’ knowledge more accurately than learners with availability tosolely qualitative information.Learners supported by a combination of qualitative and quantitative informationestimate their partners’ knowledge more accurately than learners with availability tosolely quantitative information.MethodsWe conducted an empirical study to investigate the impact of different types of awareness information on learningbehavior. After an individual phase of text reading to learn about biogas plants, students were asked tocommunicate with a bogus learning partner, of whose non genuine nature they were not aware. Therefore, thelearning environment offered the participants to write down questions and/or explanations. During this‘collaboration’, the learners were supported (or not) by a knowledge profile that allowed them to compare theirself-assessed knowledge on eight concepts about biogas plants with their partner’s knowledge. The respectivebogus partners’ knowledge was assigned by an algorithm aiming to cover all possible knowledge combinationswith random values. As seen in Figure 1, we offered four different versions of visualizations: (1) no profile (qual/quan-), (2) a profile displaying the qualitative information what concepts both know about or not (qual+/quan-),(3) one displaying the quantitative information how much learners know on biogas plants in total (qual-/qual+),ICLS 2016 Proceedings459© ISLSand (4) another displaying a combination of qualitative and quantitative information on how much learners knowabout each concept (qual+/quan+). A list of concepts was available in each condition.qual-/quan-qual+/quan-(1)(2)qual-/quan+qual+/quan+(3)(4)Figure 1. Awareness conditions: no information (1); qualitative information on present (dark boxes) and missing(light boxes) knowledge (2); quantitative information as bar chart (3); combination of both (4).Sample and designThe sample consisted of 51 persons, mainly university students, 18 to 30 years old (M = 23.18, SD = 3.06). Theparticipants were randomly assigned to one of the four experimental conditions in a 2x2 factorial design. As youcan see from Figure 1, we varied the graphical knowledge representation concerning its qualitative dimension (novisualization of qualitative information vs. visualization of qualitative information) and its quantitativeinformation (no visualization of quantitative information vs. visualization of quantitative information). Asdependent variables, we captured the number of questions (hypothesis 1), explanations (hypothesis 2), andaccurate estimations concerning the partner modeling distance (hypothesis 3). All three variables are furtherdescribed in the next section.Instruments and dependent variablesNumber of questions and explanationsThe visualization of a concept list in all conditions enabled us to assign learners’ contributions to the respectiveconcepts. The learning environment allowed subjects to select a concept and to choose between “Would you liketo ask a question?” or “Would you like to give an explanation?”. Depending on the selection, a text windowICLS 2016 Proceedings460© ISLSprompted the participant to either formulate a question or an explanation on the concept and to save the textafterwards. Figure 2 illustrates the choice to ask a question (featured by a dark background) and shows the inputwindow with a learner’s question. Participants could decide to contribute either a question or an explanation, both,or none at all for each concept. Subsequent to this bogus collaboration, we counted the numbers of questions (DVin hypothesis 1) and explanations (DV in hypothesis 2) per person.Figure 2. Learner’s view when asking a question.Estimations of knowledge, visualization of constellations, and calculation of distancesLearners’ estimations of own knowledge were needed for two reasons: (1) for the visualization of the learners’‘real’ knowledge about biogas-related concepts as a first component of their knowledge profile, and (2) as a basisto apply the algorithm that generates values to complement said profile with the visualization of the bogus learningpartner’s knowledge (if required by the test condition). Concerning (1), the learners had to rate their own degreeof knowledge (with regard to their assumed competence to explain it to a learning partner) prior to the boguscollaboration via a six-point scale (reaching from 1 = 0% knowledge to 6 = 100%, to be rated separately for eachout of eights concepts about biogas plants). To visualize the qual-/quan+ profiles, we created a total of all valuesgiven and visualized it in one aggregated bar chart per profile. The qual+/quan- profiles were realized byclassifying the values from 0 to 40% as ‘no knowledge given’ of a concept and the values from 60 to 100% as‘knowledge given’; the former minor knowledge status was visualized as a light grey box and the latter majorknowledge status as a darker green box. To create the qual+/quan+ profiles, we finally visualized each value by abar chart for each concept. Referring to (2), we designed the algorithm to build on the values described before.The algorithm generated additional random values within a reasonable range that were included into thevisualizations, taking into account that in both qual+ conditions each type of knowledge combinations shouldideally occur in equal numbers. Furthermore, the learners were asked to additionally estimate their partner’sknowledge after the collaboration. Therefore, they had to rate on a six-point scale reaching from 1 (0% knowledge)to 6 (100% knowledge) how much knowledge they award their partner concerning each concept about biogasplants. These estimations of bogus partner’s knowledge were needed for the calculation of the partner modelingaccuracy. Therefore, the values were compared to the visualized knowledge of the partner in order to determinethe distance between both (DV in hypothesis 3).ProcedureThe experimental study was conducted in our research laboratory under controlled conditions. Each participantworked on the learning environment on a single computer. After welcoming and declaration of consent, weinformed the participants that they have to read and memorize a learning text and collaborate with anotherparticipant in a computer-supported scenario. Then, we invited them to start the experiment and fill out ademographics questionnaire querying their age, sex, and level of education. Having completed these questions,the subjects were given 15 minutes to read the learning material on biogas plants Following this learning phase,they were requested to estimate their own knowledge on each given subtopic of biogas plants, just as it wasdescribed in the last chapter. The subsequent bogus collaboration took ten minutes. In this phase, the knowledgeprofile of the respective condition was presented to the participants (cf. Figure 1), and they could make theircontributions in the form of questions or explanations (cf. Figure 2). Finally, they estimated their bogus partner’sknowledge. A graphical overview of the whole procedure can be found in Figure 3.ICLS 2016 Proceedings461© ISLSFigure 3. Graphical overview of the experiment’s procedure.FindingsFor answering the question of how awareness information affects learning behavior, we observed the impact ofqualitative and quantitative cognitive information on the number of contributions to a bogus communication andon the modeling of the learning partner. Two-factorial ANOVAs were used to investigate each single hypothesis,with qualitative information (no visualization of qualitative information vs visualization of qualitativeinformation) and quantitative dimension (no visualization of quantitative information vs visualization ofquantitative information) as between-subject factors. All effects are reported as significant at p < .05.Impact of awareness information on the number of questions (hypothesis 1)We hypothesized that learners supported by the visualization of qualitative information ask more about subjectmatters than learners without qualitative information. To test this, we observed the number of total questions perperson as dependent variable. This total included solely complete sentences, since we excluded contributions ofless than three words from the calculation. There was a significant main effect of available qualitative information(qual+/quan- and qual+/quan+) on the number of questions, F(1, 47) = 4.12, p = .048, ηp² = .081. Regarding theassumption that quantitative group awareness triggers questions, there was also a significant main effect ofquantitative information (qual-+/quan+ and qual+/quan+) on the number of questions, F(1, 47) = 4.64, p = .036,ηp² = .090. Finally, there was no interaction effect of qualitative and quantitative information on the number ofquestions, F(1, 47) = 0.29, p = .590, ηp² = .006. Table 1 shows the related descriptive statistics.Table 1: Number of average questions in each condition.awarenessinformationquan- (n = 26)quan+ (n = 25)both (N = 51)qual- (n = 26)MSD2.152.343.152.542.652.45qual+ (n = 25)MSD3.081.804.752.093.882.09both (N = 51)MSD2.622.093.952.433.252.34Since we wanted to identify which visualization of knowledge results in the most questions, we furtherused a two-factorial repeated measure ANOVA with visualized qualitative information only (qual+/quan- vs.qual+/quan+) as between subject factor and knowledge constellation as within-subject factor ((1) learner’s deficitwith partner’s knowledge vs. (2) same knowledge (both have deficit or both have knowledge) vs. (3) partner’sdeficit with learners knowledge). As dependent variable, we observed the number of questions in each of saidknowledge constellations divided by the total number of occurrences of this constellation per person (which wasvarying between subjects due to their self-assessment).There was a significant main effect of knowledge constellation on the percentage of questions asked ineach category, F(2, 34) = 12.11, p < .001, ηp² = .416. The pairwise comparison for the main effect of knowledgeconstellation indicates a significant difference (p < .05) between levels 1 and 2 (learner’s deficit and sameknowledge) and 1 and 3 (learner’s deficit and partner’s deficit) but not between levels 2 and 3 (same knowledgeand partner’s deficit). In 72.8% (SD = 29.6%) of cases in which the comparison to their bogus collaborationpartner enclosed missing knowledge, learners asked a question on the belonging concept. In contrast, only in49.9% (SD = 37.8%) of cases with same knowledge, and in 28% (SD = 34.7%) of cases with better expertise thanthe partner triggered questions. This seems to indicate that learners asked a question if they recognized ownmissing knowledge compared to partner’s knowledge. Furthermore, there was a significant effect of theknowledge profile on the weighted number of questions asked in each of the three categories of knowledgeconstellation, F(1, 17) = 6.63, p = .020, ηp² = .281. As you can see from Figure 4, the combination of qualitativeand quantitative information appears to outperform solely qualitative cognitive information. Finally, there was nosignificant interaction effect of knowledge constellation and qualitative information on the weighted number ofquestions, F(2, 34) = 0.83, p = .447, ηp² = .046.ICLS 2016 Proceedings462© ISLSImpact of awareness information on the number of explanations (hypothesis 2)We tested the assumption that learners supported by a profile with qualitative information explain more aboutsubject matters than learners without access to qualitative information by investigating the number of totalexplanations as dependent variable. This total included solely complete sentences again. There was a significantmain effect of qualitative information on the number of explanations, F(1, 47) = 4.44, p = .041, ηp² = .086.Regarding the further assumption that the presence of quantitative information also triggers explanations, therewas no significant main effect of the quantitative dimension on the number of explanations, F(1, 47) = 3.45,p = .069, ηp² = .068. Furthermore, there was no interaction effect between qualitative and quantitative1009084.8(SD = 19.5)qual+ / quan+69.4(SD = 34.8)80qual+ / quan-70605060.8(SD = 33.3)36.1(SD = 41.7)403030.1(SD = 31.3)2020.0(SD = 27.0)100(1) learners' deficit(2) same knowledge(3) partners' deficitFigure 4. Percentage of questions asked per knowledge constellation weighted by the total number ofoccurrences of this constellation per person.information on the number of questions, F(1, 47) = .85, p = .179, ηp² = .038. Table 2 shows the descriptivestatistics, disclosing that, in contrast to our first assumption, most explanations were given, if no qualitativeinformation was available.Table 2: Number of average explanations in each condition.awarenessinformationquan- (n = 26)quan+ (n = 25)both (N = 51)qual- (n = 26)MSD4.611.454.851.674.731.54qual+ (n = 25)MSD3.001.354.502.113.721.88both (N = 51)MSD3.811.604.681.864.241.77Impact of awareness information on partner modeling (hypothesis 3)We used independent t-tests to test the assumption that learners supported by a combination of qualitative andquantitative information estimate their learning partners’ knowledge more accurately than learners withvisualizations of either qualitative or quantitative information. This derogation from the main research design wasrequired to separately compare (a) both qual+ conditions (qual+/quan- vs. qual+/quan+) with each other, and (b)both quan+ conditions (qual-/quan+ vs. qual+/quan+). The control group (qual-/quan-) was excluded from bothcalculations, since there was no partner information available in this condition. To observe the accuracy of partnermodeling as dependent variable, we calculated the distance between the sums of estimated partner’s knowledge(which were additionally divided by 8 in the case of the quan+ conditions) and algorithm-generated valuesvisualized in the knowledge profile. The smaller the value, the better was the accuracy.Concerning hypothesis 3a, participants supported by the combination of qualitative and quantitativeinformation (M = 1.33, SD = 0.65) estimated their partners more accurately than participants with solelyqualitative information (M = 1.62, SD = 0.89). However, this difference was not statistically significantt(15) = 0.50, p = .621, r = .13 (hypothesis 3a). Regarding hypothesis 3b, participants with available qualitativeand quantitative information differed significantly from participants with support of quantitative information,ICLS 2016 Proceedings463© ISLSt(23) = 2.83, p = .010, r = .51. Learners estimated their partners more accurately if both types of information wereavailable (M = .48, SD = 0.32) than without the combined visualization (M = 1.34, SD = 1.01).Conclusions and implicationsWe conducted this empirical study to systematically investigate the impact of visualizations of qualitative andquantitative cognitive information on collaborative learning. Both types of information are systematicallygathered and made available by cognitive group awareness tools, allowing learners for comparing to others,shaping learning mechanisms, and facilitating the control and (self-)regulation of their learning. Our assumptionthat the visualization of both qualitative and quantitative information moves learners to ask more questions ingeneral was confirmed. With an additional exploration of the two conditions offering qualitative information, wefurther showed that visualizations supporting the awareness of one’s own deficit (and partner’s knowledge) hada significantly higher impact on questioning behavior than visualizations of the same or (binary / discrete)visualizations of more knowledge than the partner. Furthermore, we could show that this effect was significantlystronger if learners were supported by the combination of qualitative and quantitative information. This onlypartially confirms the results of Dehler and colleagues (2011), since they found that the awareness of one’sknowledge gaps (independent of partner’s knowledge) is sufficient to trigger questions, meaning that visualizedgaps encouraged learners to ask partners for help. Our results indicate that besides the awareness of own gaps theconcurrent awareness of the partner being knowledgeable about the concept might be relevant to shape thequestioning behavior. Indeed, the bogus scenario requires some caution regarding the interpretation so that furtherresearch is needed in order to clarify the question what specific role is played by qualitative and quantitativeinformation.Concerning the number of explanations, it could have been expected that the visualization of partnerdeficits guides learners to give more explanations (Dehler et al., 2011). In contrast to the assumption that learnerssupported by qualitative information explain more than learners without such support, we could find thatespecially the absence of qualitative information significantly increased the number of explanations. Evenavailable quantitative information seemed to lead to more explanations, if they were presented without additionalqualitative information. One explanation as to why learners give fewer explanations with increasing level ofinformational detail might be that they can better choose relevant cases and interact in a more goal-oriented way.Furthermore, another learning mechanism central to collaborative learning could be of relevance, namely (self)explanation (cf. Dillenbourg, 1999). The absence of information may drive learners to remember the learningtext by paraphrasing it in the text windows provided during the collaboration phase of the study. However, furtherresearch is needed here to investigate this concern more deeply, not least because of the artificial scenario withouta real learning partner.Finally, we investigated whether learners supported by a visualization that combines qualitative andquantitative information estimate their partners’ knowledge more accurately than learners with availability ofsingle cognitive information. It is suggested by a large body of research that the absence of cognitive informationresults in matching own knowledge with estimations of partner (cf. Sangin et al., 2011). Small accuracy values inour study indicated that the estimations of learners were largely based on the visualizations presented to them.Although especially the availability of combined qualitative and quantitative information appeared to be useful inthis context, it needs to be clarified, if the presentation of qualitative information is sufficient to support partnermodeling. Taking cognitive load (cf. van Merriënboer & Sweller, 2005) into account, it might be thatvisualizations combining qualitative and quantitative information are associated with additional mental effort.Overall, we can derive from these results that qualitative and quantitative information visualized bycognitive group awareness tools is suitable to elicit a desired collaborative learning behavior. It is often mentionedthat prescribing collaborative activities might carry the risk of demotivating the learners (Hesse, 2007). Groupawareness tools offer an opportunity to satisfy the resulting need for implicit guidance and learners’ empowermentassociated therewith. Tracing back to Piaget’s approach, it is recommended to use knowledge profiles thatcombine qualitative and quantitative information where the intention is to make learners aware of cognitiveconflicts that elicit a meaningful exchange between them. The same applies to the support of partner modelingwhich is needed in a Vygotskian sense to maintain an accurate model of the learning partners and optimizeinternalization processes.ReferencesBodemer, D. (2011). Tacit guidance for collaborative multimedia learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 27(3),1079–1086. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2010.05.016Bodemer, D., & Buder, J. (2006). Supporting Collaborative Learning with Augmented Group Awareness Tools,3(2), 123–139. http://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-008-9037-5ICLS 2016 Proceedings464© ISLSBromme, R., Hesse, F. W., & Spada, H. (2005). Barriers, Biases and Opportunities of Communication andCooperation with Computers: Introduction and Overview. In R. Bromme, F. W. Hesse, & H. Spada(Eds.), Barriers and Biases in Computer-Mediated Knowledge Communication (Vol. 5, pp. 1–14). NewYork: Springer-Verlag. http://www.springerlink.com/index/10.1007/0-387-24319-4_1Buder, J., Schwind, C., Rudat, A., & Bodemer, D. (2015). Selective reading of large online forum discussions:The impact of rating visualizations on navigation and learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 44, 191–201. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2014.11.043Dehler, J., Bodemer, D., Buder, J., & Hesse, F. W. (2009). Providing group knowledge awareness in computersupported collaborative learning: Insights into learning mechanisms. Research and Practice inTechnology Enhanced Learning : RPTEL, 4(2), 111–132.Dehler, J., Bodemer, D., Buder, J., & Hesse, F. W. (2011). Guiding knowledge communication in CSCL via groupknowledge awareness. Computers in Human Behavior, 27(3), 1068–1078. http://doi.org/10. 1016/j.chb.2010.05.018Dillenbourg, P. (1999). What do you mean by “collaborative learning”? In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.), Collaborativelearning: Cognitive and Computational Approaches (pp. 1–19). Oxford, UK: Elsevier.Doise, W., & Mugny, G. (1984). The Social Development of the Intellect. Amsterdam: Pergamon Press.Erkens, M., & Bodemer, D. (2015). Potentials of Text Mining based Technologies for Improving Cognitive GroupAwareness. In O. Lindwall, P. Häkkinen, T. Koschmann, P. Tchounikine, & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.),Exploring the Material Conditions of Learning: The Computer Supported Collaborative Learning(CSCL) Conference 2015 (Vol. 2). Gothenburg, Sweden.Hesse, F. (2007). Being told to do something or just being aware of something? An alternative approach toscripting in CSCL. In F. Fischer, I. Kollar, H. Mandl, & J. Haake (Eds.), Scripting computer-supportedcommunication of knowledge-cognitive, computational and educational perspectives (pp. 91–98). NewYork: Springer.Janssen, J., & Bodemer, D. (2013). Coordinated Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning: Awareness andAwareness Tools. Educational Psychologist, 48(1), 40–55. http://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2012.749153Piaget, J. (1977). The development of thought: equilibration of cognitive structures. Viking Press.Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (2008). The Psychology Of The Child. Basic Books.Sangin, M., Molinari, G., Nüssli, M.-A., & Dillenbourg, P. (2011). Facilitating peer knowledge modeling: Effectsof a knowledge awareness tool on collaborative learning outcomes and processes. Computers in HumanBehavior, 27(3), 1059–1067. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2010.05.032Schittekatte, M., & Van Hiel, A. (1996). Effects of partially shared information and awareness of unsharedinformation on information sampling. Small Group Research, 27, 431–449. http://doi.org/10.1177/1046496496273006Schnaubert, L., & Bodemer, D. (2015). Subjective Validity Ratings to Support Shared Knowledge Constructionin CSCL. In O. Lindwall, P. Häkkinen, T. Koschmann, P. Tchounikine, & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.), Exploringthe Material Conditions of Learning: The Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL)Conference 2015 (Vol. 2). Gothenburg, Sweden.Tudge, J., & Rogoff, B. (1989). Peer influences on Cognitive Development: Piagetian and VygotskianPerspectives. In M. H. Bornstein & J. S. Bruner (Eds.), Interactiion in Human Development. Hillsdale,New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.van Merriënboer, J. J. G., & Sweller, J. (2005). Cognitive Load Theory and Complex Learning: RecentDevelopments and Future Directions. Educational Psychology Review, 17(2), 147–177.http://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-005-3951-0ICLS 2016 Proceedings465© ISLS