Chinese Character Composition Game for Collaborative LanguageLearningYun Wen, Singapore Centre for Chinese Language, Nanyang Technological University, yun.wen@sccl.sgWenli Chen, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, wenli.chen@nie.edu.sgAbstract: This paper presents an innovation implementation of whether and how the use of atabletop game combined with tangible cards help novice Chinese language learners to developChinese orthographic knowledge and collaborative learning skill. A positive relation betweenchildren’s orthographic awareness and character recognition has been widely acknowledged.Collaboration is a commonly used game design element and a frequently targeted gamedesign element regarding 21st century skill development. Nevertheless, little is knownregarding how games should be designed for collaborative Chinese character or vocabularylearning, and how game design may influence student collaborative learning skilldevelopment. The results of a quasi-experiment in a primary school indicate that the designedARC (augmented reality-based Chinese character composition game) is an effective systemfor improving students’ Chinese character learning performance and collaborative learningquality. The findings provide insights into game-based learning design for young learners andlanguage learners.Keywords: Game-based language learning; Chinese character learning; collaborative learning;Tangible interfacesIntroductionEducational game or game-based learning refers to a learning environment where game content and game playhelp enhance knowledge creation and skills acquisition, and where game activities involve problem solvingspaces and challenges that provide learners with a sense of achievement (Qian & Clark, 2016). There has beenan increasing interest in effects of digital game-based learning in various domains (Cornillie et al., 2012;Godwin-Jones, 2014; Qian & Clark, 2016). Language learning is no exception. Contextual game-basedlanguage learning tends to positively influence language learning (Ericson et al., 2016; Lan, 2015; Wen, 2017).Yet there is a dearth of more empirical evidence concerning how to well design educational game integratinginstructional or pedagogical strategies to support active learning (De Grove et al., 2012; Godwin-Jones, 2014).This study introduces an augmented reality-based Chinese character composition game (ARC), whichis designed for Chinese as a second language (L2) learners. It is designed by our research team in line with newChinese language curriculum of Singapore (The first language in Singapore is English). The study is concernedwith Chinese character learning, because Chinese character recognition is a major hurdle for non-native learnersand beginning learners. Chinese, as a kind of logographic language, is distinctive from English and otheralphabetic languages. The effectiveness of using technological tools on improving learning and teaching ofChinese character has been reported (Zhan & Cheng, 2014). The instantiation of technological use ranges fromweb-based reading tasks with glossing support to online personal vocabulary learning games or applications.Furthermore, collaboration is a commonly used game design element for engaging player in social interactions,and it is a frequently targeted game design element regarding 21st century skill development. However, little isknown regarding how games should be designed for collaborative Chinese character or vocabulary learning, andhow games may influence student collaborative learning skill development (Qian & Clark, 2016).ARC is a tabletop game with tangible paper interfaces designed for enabling collaborative L2 learningin classrooms. It has been using in two Singapore primary schools for one year. In this paper, a quasiexperiment in one Singapore primary school will be presented to demonstrate the effect of the game play onChinese character learning and collaborative learning. The study aims at not only contributing to the researchliterature in Chinese character teaching for L2 learners but also shedding light on game-based language learningdesign for young participants.Related studiesCoupling physical and virtual objects in character learningThe interactive tabletop environment can provide interesting ways to represent learning content, and thusmotivate learners to be engaged in language learning. Multimedia vocabulary learning environments can helpICLS 2018 Proceedings208© ISLSlearners construct connections between the verbal and visual representational systems, resulting in an increase invocabulary knowledge (Chen et al., 2013). Furthermore, interactive tabletops are designed for co-location,multiple user participation, integrating hands-on activates and enabling multiple modes of communication, andtheir benefits to education have been evidenced as well (Dillenbourg & Evans, 2011).As for the interactive interface, various arguments have been put forward for why manipulatives(defined as physical objects that can be touched or moved by students to reinforce a concept) may supportlearning, for instance, providing an additional channel for conveying information, increasing flexibility,empowering students to process and organize information at their own pace, facilitating abstraction andimproving memory through physical action (Manches et al., 2010). In the context of language teaching andlearning, Corrales (2008) stated that the manipulative can provide opportunities for students to process andorganize learning information on their own and at their own pace. Actually, in traditional language teaching,using foreign language flashcards and other manipulatives is a common method to make learning a foreignlanguage fun and exciting. In this study, with the paper interface, the tabletop game not only uses paper as adocument with digital capabilities for augmenting its content, but also keeps paper’s intrinsic properties, e.g.,tangibility, maneuverability, and flexibility (Prieto et al., 2014).Character composition for character recognitionThough Chinese character learning is particularly challenging for beginning learners, characters are not randomsymbols without pattern and regularities. The structure of Chinese characters can be classified by a 3-layerhierarchy: character, component, and stroke. A character is basically constructed by strokes and theircombination. Some components are Chinese characters by themselves and these characters are called simplecharacters or integral characters. Those composed of more than one component are called compound characters.The vast majority of Chinese characters (in the range of 80% to 90%) are compound characters, which areusually composed of a phonetic or semantic component (Shu & Anderson, 1999). Radicals are defined as themeaningful orthographic units that play semantic or phonetic roles in compound characters (Shen & Ke, 2007,p.99). Theoretically, a radical represents the sound of a character or a clue to the meaning of the character (Chenet al., 2013). Radicals have two major features: (1) habitual positions with characters, and (2) function ofencoding phonetic information or semantic information of characters (Su & Kim, 2014).A positive relation between Chinese children’s orthographic awareness and character recognition hasbeen widely acknowledged (Chen et al., 2013). Research also has shown that knowledge of radicals plays animportant role in enhancing character learning achievement not only for young school children but also for adultL2 learners (e.g., Shen & Ke, 2007; Su & Kim, 2014). In Gobert et al.’s opinion (2001), it is based on theprinciple of chunking, in which a chunk refers to a collection of elements having a strong association with oneanother. Because of chunking, learners can utilize familiar character with a phonetic radical or semanticcomponent to learn and memorize those characters with the identical component but they have not learned yet.With restricted vocabulary, it may not be easy for beginning learners to realize the importance ofcharacter’s radicals. Yet some studies have tested the beginning Chinese learners’ sensitivity to the structures ofChinese characters. They found that the development of semantic radical awareness helped Chinese learnersguess the meaning of unknown or unfamiliar characters and revise what has been learned while learning the new(Shen & Ke, 2007). The studies (Ke & Li, 2011; Su, 2010) suggest that the development of orthographicawareness could begin at the first year of study for non-native learners. Indeed, radical-derived characterteaching, this instruction approach has become more and more popular in teaching Chinese children characters(Huang, 2008). The effectiveness of this approach was also evidenced by Zhao and Jiang (2002) in their studyon investigating 124 non-native learners. It was found that Chinese language use, including summarizingcharacters with similar pronunciation, meaning or graphic features, appeared to be the most effective incharacter learning. The findings of Shen’s study (2005) also suggested that systematically introducing radicalknowledge to beginning learners can help make sound-shape-meaning connections and greatly facilitatecharacter learning.In language classrooms, it is sometimes the case that teachers explicitly deliver the radical knowledgeto learners. Nevertheless, classroom pedagogy has gradually shifted from knowledge transmission to knowledgeconstruction. Shen & He (2007) compared three types of encoding strategies used in character learning: rotememorization, student self-motivated elaboration, and teacher-guided elaboration. Her findings indicated thatelaboration resulted in significantly better retention of sound and meaning of characters than rote memorization.Between student self-motivated elaboration and teacher-guided elaboration, retention of sound and meaning wassignificantly better with teacher-guided elaboration in study intervals of 20 minutes, but this advantagedisappeared at 48 hours recall interval. In a recent study, Shen and Xu (2014) further provided empiricalevidence to support the effectiveness of active learning in classroom vocabulary learning for beginning-levelICLS 2018 Proceedings209© ISLSChinese L2 learners. In other words, student self-directed elaboration can be deemed as an effective approach tolearning Chinese characters. Therefore, all the system-based games are designed in radical-derived characterlearning approach, and students are able to generate and record their own elaboration of the target characterswith the support of the ARC system.Chinese character composition game: ARCIn the radical-derived character learning approach, every ARC-based activity is designed to help the studentrecognize radicals, structures, and compound Chinese characters. A total of six sorts of activities is designed.They are (1) filling characters in a sentence; (2) classifying characters in a paragraph; (3) guessing the characterto a raddle; (4) recognizing characters according to the picture; (5) character family; and (6) characterconnection. Meanwhile, three kinds of paper cards are prepared for students to complete these activities,including structure cards, radical cards, and component cards (see Figure 1). Based on the new Chineselanguage curriculum of Singapore, the designed ARC game covers approximately 50% compound Chinesecharacters and over 70% radicals that students need to recognize in primary 1 and primary 2.To “augment” cards, near-field communication (NFC) readers are used in our system. Like RFID, NFChas advantages of cost-effectiveness and stability of data communication. Every single card is attached to anNFC tag. With this technology, when many cards are on the table at the same time, card information will not beread without mutual interference. Once students tape a card on the NFC reader, its related information will beidentified and represented on the iPad screen immediately. In the ARC classroom, students are divided intosmall groups to play the game together. They are encouraged to exchange cards to complete the activitycollaboratively. On the basis of the literature, we assume that students will communicate and exchange ideas alot with one another. Thus, they would have a good understanding of the target character.Figure 1. ARC setting within a small groupFigure 2. Self-directed work paceThe activity “filling characters in a sentence”, as an example, in this activity a sentence and its correspondingpicture are displayed on iPad screen to provide students the contextual information of the target character.Within a group, students need to discuss the missing Chinese character. After making a consensus, they pick upthe structure card for the Chinese character first, and then selected its corresponding radical and compoundsequentially. During this entire process, whenever the group cannot make a decision or have no idea about howto continue, they can seek help from the system using the hint card.After the target Chinese character having been constructed successfully, the group members can useaccessory cards to select the exploratory task that they would like to follow. As shown in Figure 3, if a group ofstudents with low language proficiency, they can use the “Pin Yin” card or the “Word & sentence” card to gethow the character should be pronounced, or how the character could be used in a concrete scenario. Whilst for agroup of students with high language proficiency, they can select those pink color cards to generate their owngroup artifacts related to the target Chinese character. The card “Let talk”, for example, can be used, whenstudents would like to draw a picture of scenario and verbally make a relevant sentence with the given Chinesecharacter.Research designA quasi-experimental design was adopted in this study to examine the affordances of the ARC system and theireffects on students’ learning performance and competency of collaborative learning. Multiple data sources weretriangulated, and the combination of the quantitative and qualitative analysis was used to analyze them.ICLS 2018 Proceedings210© ISLSThe participants of this study were grade one students (aged between 7 to 8 years) from aneighborhood primary school in Singapore. Forty-nine students from two classes were involved in our study.During the experimental period, these two classes were taught by the same teacher, Mr A. He is a tech-savvy.He was a computer science engineer, and then came to teach in this school 3 years ago. Both classes received anequivalent amount of instructional time and participated in the similar activities, but the experimental class usedARC game system (N=24), and the control class did not (N=25).The ARC game designed for primary 1 consists of 4 sections. To keep consistent with school syllabus,our school-based intervention spanned approximately five months, from April 2017 to September 2017. Theintervention procedure related to the two classes is detailed in Figure 3. At the beginning, all the students spent10 minutes to complete a pre-test for testing their Chinese orthographic knowledge. One technical trainingsession (20 minutes) was conducted by our researchers to the experimental class. In the experimental period,each class received an equivalent amount of instructional time and participated in the similar activity design. Inboth classroom environments, on the basis of the students’ language proficiency, 3 to 4 students wereheterogeneously grouped by the teacher and sat together. After the intervention, a 10-minute post-test wasdelivered to all the participants. Considering the age of students, we conducted a focus group discussion ratherthan a survey for all the students. Four students per class were randomly selected to participate in the focusgroup discussion to share with us their attitudes towards playfulness, collaboration, and the game design (20mins per group).Additionally, a one-hour professional development session was conducted to Mr A before ARC lesson,to help him being familiar with the system and its design principles. Semi-structured post-interview wasadministered to get his reflections on teaching and feedback about using ARC.Figure 3. Procedure of class interventionData sources and analysisData in relation to the learning outcome and processes were collected and triangulated to examine the ARCaffordances and effects. Concentrating on the learning outcome, pre-test and post-test were designed to measurestudents’ Chinese orthographic knowledge. A positive relation between children’s orthographic awareness andChinese character recognition has been widely acknowledged (Chen et al., 2013). The tests were developed byour research team, referencing a series of tests created by Hung and Fang (2006) and the test created by Chen etal. (2013). We modified the original tests by considering local students’ Chinese language proficiency, and thetests were validated by one primary school master teacher. A total of 40 questions were included in the test witha total score of 40. Gain analysis was used to examine students’ learning performance.To collect learning process data, during each class, a video-camera was set up at the back of theclassroom to record the class process. Meanwhile, two other video cameras were set to record two small groupsin each class. The video data of face-to-face group interactions were the main data sources for this study. Thevideo data-based analysis of this study consists of two steps. First, we analyzed and assessed small groupcollaboration by the rubric developed by Meier et al. (2007). They proposed 9 dimensions to capture the maincharacteristics of collaboration, and each dimension was rated on a 5-point scale (1=lowest; 5=highest) and thesum of these formed the final collaboration score of each group. In our coding, however, we only included 8dimensions and excluded the dimension of technical coordination, since it was not suitable for assessing thequality of collaborative processes happened in the control class. Two trained researchers assessed the recordedICLS 2018 Proceedings211© ISLSdata using the rubric for a total of 7 lessons in both the experimental and control classes. The first lesson of thecontrol class was not included because the class grouping had a change after the first lesson. The inter-raterreliability of Cronbach’s Alpha was 0.89.Second, the data about small group interactions were transcribed verbatim and coded in terms of theconcept of collaborative dialogue and the analytical unit of language related episodes (LREs). Collaborativedialogue was proposed by Swain (Swain & Lapkin, 1998; Swain & Deters, 2007) to investigate the act ofproducing spoken/written language that is the key to students’ understanding of complex linguisticconcepts/knowledge. In this study, we described the occurrence of LREs when L2 learners were participated ingroup activities, in order to examine students’ language learning process in both classes. The qualitative analysisof the video data and field notes helped to explain when the interactions took place or why they did not happen.To make sure the reliability of the data analysis, during the entire coding process, two experienced researchersexamined the data, completed the coding independently, and then collaborated and built a consensus on theircoding. To make sure the reliability of the data analysis, during the entire coding process, two experiencedresearchers examined the data, completed the coding independently, and then collaborated and built a consensuson their coding.ResultsLanguage learning outcomeThe learning gain per student was computed by subtracting the post-test score by the pre-test score. Resultsshowed that Mr. A’s ARC class students gained mean=8.61 (n=23, SD=5.92) scores from the learning while thecontrol class student gained mean=-5.43 (n=22, SD=4.12). The independent t-test revealed that the ARC classstudents made significant improvement compared with the control class students (t=9.19, p<.01). The learninggain of the control class showed negative. This might be caused by the inconsistency of difficulty level of thetests. The pre-test was designed with low difficulty level because it was for students who had just attendedprimary school. The overall results indicated that students learned Chinese characters with the ARC game madean obvious improvement in orthographic knowledge and awareness.Collaborative learning processThe histograms in Figure 4 show the mean score of the quality of collaborative learning of each dimension forthe two classes. They indicated that groups in the ARC class outperformed than in the control class in mostdimensions. Regarding the score of the dimension of time management, however, groups in the control classperformed better than in the ARC class. In our class observation, sometimes students in the ARC class spent toomuch time on the tasks they interested in, especially those exploratory tasks that required students to generatetheir own group artifacts. We designed the ARC game to provide students with sufficient autonomy that everysingle group could learn at own pace. Nevertheless, we also noticed that the time management competency ofthe students at this young age was still weak, let alone in the game-based environment.No difference was found between the two classes in the score of task division. Based on the classobservation, we reasoned that it might be because the problems provided to students were not complicatedenough, so they did not have to divide the task to subtasks. Yet it is worth noticing that students in the ARCclass did better than the control class in the dimensions of sustainable mutual understanding, dialogue/actionmanagement, research consensus, and reciprocal interaction.Taking time into consideration, we aggregated the numerical scores of all 8 dimensions to obtain asingle score to each lesson and displayed them in Figure 5. At the beginning of the intervention, there was nomuch difference between the two classes. Then the quality of collaborative learning of the ARC class constantlyimproved. As we observed, with the paper interface, all the students had an equal opportunity to participate, sothey were actively engaged. Hence, compared with the control class, the game playing in the ARC class wasless dominated by one or two students whose language proficiency were comparatively high. At the first ARClesson, we observed many students scrambled for playing the game. They continually tapped the cards withoutdiscussion, but soon students realized that this way of playing affected their group’s leader board ranking.Students at this age were particularly concerned about badge displayed in games. In the following ARC lessons,we observed that they learned to discuss with others before using the cards. More dialogues about actionmanagement could be observed in the ARC class. However, the change in the control class was not obvious.ICLS 2018 Proceedings212© ISLSFigure 4. The comparison of the score in each dimensionbetween the two classesFigure 5. The quality of collaborative learningin each lessonThe score retrogression of the control class in the last lesson might be caused by the type of game design. In thecontrol class, students did the tasks without the hints or immediate feedback provided by the system, and thusmost often they needed to seek help from the textbook or their teacher when got stuck. The activity of the lastlesson was about word puzzle that was difficult to find hints from the textbook, so students in the control classwere less engaged in this activity. On the contrary, with the hints and contextual animation simulation, studentsin the ARC class were well engaged.Besides, though an obvious increment of the collaborative learning score was detected in the ARCclass, we had to point out that there was still room for improvement in students’ collaborative learning (seeFigure 5). Even at the end, the aggregated score of all the dimensions was only 25.75, which was about 64% ofthe full score 40. Except for the factors of age and activity design, the characteristics of L2 learning mightaffect students’ collaborative learning performance as well. As shown in the video data, even though themajority of students in the ARC class were consistently engaged in the activity, not much collaborative dialogue(LREs) took place without teachers’ intervention.Language-related episodesThe time of each lesson of both the ARC and control classes was approximately 60 minutes. As shown in Table1, in the ARC class, the average time the teacher provided for student group work was about 44.0 minutes(SD=1.99). Less time of activities was provided for students in the control class and more deviation among thelessons was found (mean=33.94, SD=2.39). According to our classroom observation, the teacher spent less timeon introducing the rules of the activities and it was easier for him to provide feedback to students’ work at theclass level in the ARC class.The average number of LREs observed in the ARC class was 5.38 (SD= 1.41), and it was 2.50(SD=1.05) in the control class. Though LREs happened more frequently in the ARC class than the control class,generally speaking, they did not happen frequently during group work process. In other words, even though theARC game was designed for collaborative learning, the context of L2 Chinese character learning, studentstalked little about the language they were producing, they seldom questioned their language use or correctedthemselves or others. The LREs in the ARC class were more observed when students were selecting radicalcards or were generating own group artifacts, for example, in the process of writing the target Chinese characteror making oral sentences. An increasing number of the LREs could be found when students were choosingradical cards to compose characters. It suggested that the students became more aware of their physical actionswith the manipulatives. Nevertheless, the result was unexpected that the LRE seldom took place when studentslooking at the pictures or animations providing contextual information about the target character.Table 1. Activity time distribution and LREs frequencyClassActivity TimeGroupL1L2L3L4Experimental41.14 44:35 45:55 45:14ABICLS 2018 Proceedings213L153L264LREs FrequencyL354L475© ISLSControl36.5932:0533:19CD313242Discussion and conclusionThis study demonstrated an innovation implementation of the use of a tabletop game combined with tangiblecards helped novice Chinese language learners to develop Chinese orthographic knowledge and collaborativelearning skill. Pedagogically, this study suggested an effective approach to improving L2 learners’ Chineseorthographic knowledge. It provided empirical evidence to support the views of many scholars in the field ofgame-based language learning, that interactive multimedia and multimode can help to create a contextuallearning environment, which can effectively help learners construct knowledge.Regarding the game-based learning design for young learners and language learners, the results of thestudy revealed that the tangible interface, together with the badge mechanism, helped to increase the quality ofgroup collaboration. They helped to trigger more coordination during the game play. The use of the tangiblecards enabled natural interactions and potentially allowed young students to engage with educational contentand collaboration.From our results, however, it also appeared that in the context of L2 learning, not many in-situlanguage-related problem solving or discussion emerged in language use. Our initial assumption was that themore language-related discussion or language use would take place when students could collaborate well tocomplete a task. Yet it was only observed that more LREs regarding the semantic meaning of the radicalsemerged in composing Chinese characters. It suggested that students learned to evaluate the radicals selectedand thought about ways to compose characters. It revealed that the students were able to reflect on their actionsof manipulatives, but they seldom spontaneously discussed the meaning or the context in which the targetcharacter could be used. The students showed more concentration on whether the character was correctlycomposed or not. After that, they paid little attention to the feedback information provided by the game, such asthe multimedia contextual information about how to the generated character could be used. Therefore, the futuregame design could pay more attention to scaffolds that may problematize the subject matter by causing studentsto pay more attention to critical ideas and connection between new contextual information and existingknowledge of the Chinese character. The type of problematizing scaffold may create opportunities for deeperprocessing and more productive learning (Reiser, 2004).As for the limitation of the study, the qualitative rating scheme was used to generate a quantitativemanure, but it still had the limitation of requiring human judgment. The findings were drawn based on the ARCimplementation in a primary one class. Further multiple studies and relevant work will be planned andconducted in the collaborative schools. As the data gets richer, the following studies will further explore thecorrelation between students’ system-based learning trajectories and their learning outcomes, and place moreemphasis on investigating how the manipulatives could be designed and used to encourage students to reflect ontheir experiences in the game play. The findings will have a broad range of possible implementations forgamed-based L2 learning, beyond Chinese character learning.ReferencesChen, H.-C., Hsu, C.-C., Chang, L.-Y., Lin, Y.-C., Chang, K.-E., & Sung, Y.-T. (2013). Using a radical-derivedcharacter E-learning platform to increase learning knowledge of Chinese characters. LanguageLearning & Technology, 17(1), 89-106.Cornillie, F., Thorne, S. L., & Desmet, P. (2012). ReCALL special issue: Digital games for language learning:challenges and opportunities. ReCALL, 24(3), 243–256.Corrales, K. (2008). Getting your hands-on learning: Manipulative tools in content ESL/EFL instruction. LatinAmerican Journal of Content and Language Integrated Learning and Instruction, 1(1), 60-65.Dillenbourg, P., & Evans, M. (2011). Interactive tabletops in education. Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning, 6, 491-514.De Grove, F., Bourgonjon, J., & Van Looy, J. (2012). Digital games in the classroom? A contextual approach toteachers’ adoption intention of digital games in formal education. Computers in Human Behavior,28(6), 2023–2033.Ericson, M., Santos, C., In, A., Lübke, W., Taketomi, T., Yamamoto, G., … Kato, H. (2016). Augmented realityas multimedia: the case for situated vocabulary learning.Huang, Y. P. (2008). Investigation on the effectiveness of radical instruction in character recognition instructionand its application. The Elementary Education Journal. 55 (1), 63-67.Hung, L. Y. & Fang, J. Y. (2006). Test on Semantic Radicals. Taipei, TW: Special Education Unit, Ministry ofICLS 2018 Proceedings214© ISLSEducation.Jiang, X., & Cohen, A. D. (2012). A critical review of research on strategies in learning Chinese as both secondand foreign language. Studies in Second Language Learning and Teaching, 1, 9-43.Ke, C., & Li, Y. A. (2011). Chinese as a Foreign Language in the US. Journal of Chinese Linguistics, 39(1),177-238.Lan, Y. J. (2015). Contextual EFL learning in a 3D virtual environment. Language Learning & Technology,19(2), 16-31.Lantolf, J. P., & Thorne, S. L. (2006). Sociocultural theory and the genesis of second language development.Oxford: Oxford University Press.Manches, A., O’Malley, C., & Benford, S. (2010). The role of physical representations in solving numberproblems: A comparison of young children’s use of physical and virtual materials. Computers &Education, 54, 622-640.Meier, A., Spada, H., & Rummel, N. (2007). A rating scheme for assessing the quality of computer-supportedcollaboration processes. Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2, 63-86.Prieto, L. P., Wen, Y., Caballero, D., & Dillenbourg, P. (2014). Review of augmented paper systems ineducation: An orchestration perspective. Educational Technology & Society, 17 (4), 169-185.Qian, M., & Clark, K. (2016). Game-based Learning and 21st century skills: A review of recent research.Computers in Human Behavior, 63, 50–58.Reiser, B. J. (2004). Scaffodling complex learning: the mechanisms of structuring and problematizing studentwork. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13 (3), 273-304.Shen, H. H., & Ke, C. (2007). Radical awareness and word acquisition among nonnative learners of Chinese.The Modern Language Journal, 91(1), 79-111.Shu, H., & Anderson, R. C. (1997). Role of radical awareness in the character and word acquisition of Chinesechildren. Reading Research Quarterly, 32, 78–89.Su, X., & Kim, Y. S. (2014). Semantic radical knowledge and word recognition in Chinese for Chinese asforeign language learners. Reading in a Foreign Language, 26 (1), 131-152Swain, M., & Deters, P. (2007). "New" mainstream SLA theory: Expanded and enriched. The ModernLanguage Journal, 91(Focus Issue), 820-836.Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1998). Interaction and second language learning: Two adolescent French immersionstudents working together. The Modern Language Journal, 82(iii), 320-338.Wen, Y. (2017) Augmented reality based Chinese character composition game in L2 classrooms. InProceedings of CALL 2017. Berkeley, US.Wen, Y., Looi, C.K., & Chen, W.L. (2015) Appropriation of a representational tool in a second-languageclassroom, International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 10 (1), pp. 77-108.Zhan, H., & Cheng, H.-J. (2014). The Role of Technology in Teaching and Learning Chinese Characters.International Journal of Technology in Teaching and Learning, 10(2), 147–162.ICLS 2018 Proceedings215© ISLS