Conceptual Goals While Using a Simulation: Three DifferentSources and Learning OutcomesRobert C. Wallon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, rwallon2@illinois.eduRobb Lindgren, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, robblind@illinois.eduAbstract: Although there is a broad research base demonstrating positive science learningoutcomes from simulation use, less is known about the learning processes that may mediatethese outcomes. This study investigated the source of conceptual goals that students pursuedwhile using a simulation. Using a case study approach, we found that student goals were fromthree main sources: instructional materials, self, and instructor. Findings suggest that selfselected conceptual goals may result in more stable knowledge.Introduction and theoretical frameworkAlthough there is broad consensus that computer simulations are effective for promoting science learningoutcomes, less is known about mediating learning processes (Rutten, van Joolingen, & van der Veen, 2012). Thus,this study investigates sources of conceptual goals that students pursue while using a simulation and theirimplications for learning outcomes. In addition, this study involves investigating student engagement inconstructing explanations and modeling, which is timely and relevant because these are two practices that areemphasized in the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013). This study addresses thefollowing research question: What are sources of the conceptual goals that students pursue while using a seasonssimulation to model and construct explanations?This study is framed by a view of conceptions as dynamically emergent structures (Brown, 2014). In thisview, there is unison of seemingly dichotomous perspectives on student conceptions as fragmentary and theorylike, and it suggests affordances of examining conceptions in multiple ways. Importantly, this view suggests thatconceptions “are dynamically emergent from the interactions of conceptual resources” (Brown, 2014, p. 1473).This dynamic view of conceptions highlights the importance of closely examining the contexts in whichconceptions are developed.MethodThis study was conducted from an interpretivist paradigm (which can be considered a subcategory of thequalitative research paradigm). Accordingly, this study used instrumental case-study methods (Stake, 1995) toinvestigate the research question. The data for this study come from video observations and interviews. Videorecordings were made of one group of three middle-school students using a simulation intended to help themdevelop explanations for causes of the seasons. The video was combined with synchronized screen recordings, soit was possible to see what students were doing within the simulation. Video recordings of individual studentsgiving explanations of the seasons after using the simulation were also included in the data set. The classroomteacher was asked to select students who had permission to be video recorded to work in groups. The study tookplace during normal classroom instruction of an eighth-grade astronomy unit in a public middle school located inthe Midwestern United States. During the study, students used a novel learning environment called a gestureaugmented simulation. This type of simulation differs from conventional simulations in that it affords interactionusing hand motions rather than a mouse or trackpad. While students were using the simulation, they were providedwith a worksheet that indicated settings to select in the simulation windows to create various “setups.” Theworksheets also asked students to focus on specific aspects of the simulations such as depictions of the angle oflight rays or spacing of light rays hitting a patch of ground.FindingsCase analysis showed that there were three main sources for the conceptual goals that students pursued whileusing the simulation: (a) instructional materials, (b) self, and (c) instructor. Two of these categories are illustratedin the following sections.Conceptual goals from instructional materialsIn this episode, students used settings in the simulation that were listed on a worksheet, which asked students tofocus on the angle of light rays.S2: June is when it’s the most straight down [gestures to show steep angle of light rays], andICLS 2018 Proceedings1697© ISLSS1: Yeah.S2: December’s like the lowest [clicks and drags the earth in its orbit from June to December and thento March and back to December].S3: Yeah. When you go back to March it gets higher, then it gets lower.S1: Mmhmm.In this episode students noticed the difference in the angle of the light rays between summer and winter for theselected city. All students in the group expressed agreement for the idea, and then they continued with the activitywithout further discussion of the underlying reasons for the difference in the angle of the light rays.Conceptual goals from selfIn this episode, one student in the group spontaneously changed settings in the simulation.S2: [clicks to load an earth view in a third window that had previously been empty] Hey, that’s cool.Look at that.S1: Oh, whoa! Use your hand, use your hand now.S2: No, I just want to watch it.S1: No, I want to see. I wanna use my hand.S2: We’re the closest in June. Dang. We’re the closest to the equator in June.S3: We are?S2: We’re the closest to the equator in June.S1: [uses gesture control to view simultaneous changing of light ray angle, orbit, and earth] That’s socool.In this episode one student changed settings in the simulation to investigate an idea that seemed to come upspontaneously. When he loaded the “earth view” he mistakenly identified the line depicting the earth’s orbit asthe equator. After watching the simulation for a few moments, the student concluded that his city moves closer tothe equator in summer and farther from the equator in winter. Another student in the group expressed surprise andinterest in this idea (“We are?”) while the other group member did not acknowledge the comment.ConclusionsThis study responds to a need to better understand learning processes when students use simulations by showinghow students pursue conceptual goals from various sources. These results are important because they show thatideas that were generated from self-selected conceptual goals seemed to be more salient than ideas generated fromother sources. Returning to a dynamically emergent perspective of conceptions (Brown, 2014), this may suggestthat conceptions from self-selected goals may form stronger “attractor” states for students, and thus, those ideasmay be the most salient ones used in explanations provided by the student. This raises new issues for practicessuch as modeling and explanation with regards to the extent to which learners converge on shared understandingof phenomena. Additional research is needed to further explore connections between the source of conceptualgoals, as well as other aspects of learning processes, and student learning outcomes.ReferencesBrown, D. E. (2014). Students’ conceptions as dynamically emergent structures. Science & Education, 23, 1463–1483.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For states, by states. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Rutten, N., van Joolingen, W. R., & van der Veen, J. T. (2012). The learning effects of computer simulations inscience education. Computers & Education, 58, 136–153.Stake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No.DUE-1432424.Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authorsand do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1698© ISLS