Equity in the Learning Sciences: Recent Themes and PathwaysSuraj Uttamchandani, Indiana University, suttamch@indiana.eduAbstract: Although efforts to critique deficit models of cognition and address educationalinequity are foundational to the learning sciences, there has been particularly rich work done inthis tradition in recent years. In this paper, I offer a set of pathways that characterize this worktowards justice in the learning sciences, work which reflects a variety of means and ends. Thepathways are: (1) Consider the goals of an equity-oriented framework for learning; (2)Theoretically, draw on existing critical social theory; (3) Methodologically, focus oncollaborative change-making, and; (4) Support heterogeneity in knowing and doing. Thesepathways are neither exhaustive nor mutually exclusive, but rather provide an assessment of thecurrent justice-oriented landscape in the learning sciences. I then argue that heterogeneity inmeans and ends towards addressing learning inequities is fruitful for the field and offer someopen questions with which the critical learning sciences has yet to fully contend.Keywords: equity, dignity, justice, heterogeneityIntroductionAt the 2014 ICLS Conference, Booker, Vossoughi, and Hooper (2014) advocated for a political theory of learning.They compellingly argued, “If we are interested in what the learning sciences can offer for how to democratizelearning, we need our theoretical and methodological tools to help us wrestle with inequity and dehumanization”(p. 921). Although these ideas are not brand new to the learning sciences (LS), we as a field are at but the onsetof our theorizing about the relationship between social (in)justice and learning (Politics of Learning WritingCollective, 2017; Nasir, Rosebery, Warren, & Lee, 2014). In the four years since Booker et al.’s call, a significantamount of LS work towards educational equity has emerged. This includes a special issue of the Journal of theLearning Sciences on social justice (Tabak & Radinsky, 2014), a special issue of Cognition and Instruction onparticipatory design research (Bang & Vossoughi, 2016), and a new volume on the intersection of critical socialtheory and sociocultural learning theories, Power and Privilege in the Learning Sciences (Esmonde & Booker,2017). This work together recognizes the potential LS has to combat discriminatory social structures, empowerall learners, and bring positive social changes.In this paper, I review many of these recent contributions with the goal of understanding the nature ofcontemporary learning scholarship that focuses explicitly on issues of equity, justice, and learner dignity. As Iwill discuss, what equity-oriented research means has varied considerably, but in general this work shares a focuson broadening participation in learning and eliminating discrimination in educational environments. I explicatefour pathways that characterize how LS scholars have thought through equity philosophically, theoretically, andmethodologically. I offer the pathways as a heuristic for thinking through the flavor of LS research on equity todate. It is my hope that the pathways outlined here: (a) clarify the shape and form of equity-oriented research thatinforms the field broadly, and (b) provide a starting point for researchers new to such approaches to findresonances between their research and existing work.Given space limitations, this paper is not meant to be a comprehensive review of the literature. The initialreadings discussed above led me to new authors and new readings. As I engaged in identifying and reviewing therelevant literature, I employed a broad understanding of “learning sciences research” to include the general studyof how people learn. In addition, I drew upon other literature when it seemed to inform the pathway beingdiscussed. Of course, this resulted in the inclusion of some literature at the expense of other pieces. However, Ido not mean for these pathways themselves to be exhaustive or mutually exclusive; rather they are incompleteand intersecting. The pathways are meant to call attention to the multiplicity of ways that learning sciencesresearchers have and might orient to scholarship in the service of equity. I conclude by discussing the importanceof heterogeneity in our approaches to criticality and offer some open questions for the field to consider movingforward.Pathway #1: Consider the goals of an equity-oriented framework for learningPhilip and Azevedo (2017) outlined four discourses in science education research that seeks equity. The first twodiscourses focus on helping students connect to and identify with science, and in so doing seek to make surelearners have “a seat at the table.” The third discourse seeks to leverage out-of-school science to reconceptualizewhat is valued in in-school science, and so it focuses on changing the discipline to be less hostile to learners. TheICLS 2018 Proceedings480© ISLSfourth discourse focuses on how science is and is not used to achieve justice through activism on the larger sociallevel, and so this research focuses on participation in work to dismantle oppressive social systems. The authorsstress that the third and fourth discourses, which center the transformation of systems rather than focusing onindividuals, are not necessarily better than the first two, which may make available more immediate material gainsfor learners. Likewise, in LS writ large, we need not make a hierarchy of equity-oriented research. While “bigpicture” research that thinks deeply about the transformation of social systems is necessary, so too is research thatbroadens participation even in unjust systems (e.g., helping minoritized learners access profitable career paths)that results in material gains for minoritized individuals. It is promising that heretofore LS research has supporteda variety of definitions of what “equity” looks like and means.Any understanding of equity and learning must resist the belief that more learning is necessarily a meanstowards equity. Learning is not a priori a good thing; many people learn things like racist practice or ineffectivefolk theories of teaching. This knowledge is dangerous insofar as one person’s learning of such knowledge hasnegative symbolic and material consequences for other people. This is summarized well by Biesta (2013):To suggest that learning is good or desirable – and thus to suggest that it is something whichshould go on throughout one’s life or which should be promoted in schools – does therefore notreally mean anything until it is specified what the content of the learning is and, moreimportantly, until it is specified what the purpose of the learning is. (p. 6).Indeed, as Biesta notes, when we focus on learning-as-change, we – perhaps unconsciously – make an evaluativejudgment that the temporally earlier state of affairs was bad or worse than the amorphous “after learning.” It ispossible that this focus on learning-as-change might cause us to approach an individual as damaged and thelearning process as one of repair (a deficit orientation). That said, oppressive aspects of social systems must bechallenged and subject to change. Therefore, equity-oriented work on learning might avoid deficit perceptions ofindividuals by choosing to focus on structural, social, and community entities.Equity-oriented work that centers individuals might also ask how the learner and others are benefittingfrom the individual’s engagement in learning practices. Undoubtedly, certain kinds of learning better positionlearners to perform well on standardized tests, be admitted to prestigious higher education institutions, and accessparticular career opportunities. Scholars may additionally believe there is something intrinsically powerful aboutthe disciplinary skills and content we seek to help learners acquire. Contention with these ends of educationalequity represents the first pathway of equity-oriented learning research. It asks: why learning?Espinoza and Vossoughi (2014) conceptualize the learning process as one in which learners can realizetheir human dignity and potential. Grounding their analysis in a history of learning among African Americanpeople in the United States – who through slavery and its compatriots were violently and explicitly forbidden tolearn – they write:Insofar as learning helps persons and selves flourish, it is dignity-conferring. Dignity can bederived from productive participation in the process of learning. Although perilous, it can alsobe acquired from resistance to the inaccessibility of the opportunity to learn. (p. 287).A focus on human dignity challenges us to consider the relationship of learning to legally-sanctioned violationsof human dignity (e.g., modern mass incarceration in the United States). With this in mind, scholars have askedwhat learning provides to the learner that does not come at the cost of dehumanizing them (e.g., by “pushing”learners through inequitable environments). For example, a career-oriented focus on STEM learning pusheswomen through the “STEM pipeline,” at the end of which they still make significantly less money than their whitemale counterparts (Sengupta-Irving, 2015). Instead, Sengupta-Irving (2015) argues that math education can (butdoes not automatically) offer an opportunity for self-determination and for becoming. Vossoughi (2015) proposesthe notion of intellectual respect as key to equitable environments. In practice, an example of such an approachis found in the work of Gutiérrez (2008), in which youth are empowered to learn sociocritical literacy, tools tosupport their individual and collective moves towards justice. The program is explicitly designed to support deepacademic learning – that directly opens college and career pathways – while ensuring learners can engage in socialdreaming, seeing themselves as cultural-historical actors with agency to create a better world. Bang (2017) pointsout that a decolonial and indigenous ethic towards sociocultural learning theory may offer great possibility forhuman and community collective continuance, that is, “a community’s capacity to be adaptive in ways sufficientfor the livelihoods of its members to flourish into the future” (Whyte, 2013, p. 518). Loaded with possibility, theseapproaches conceptualize learning as an endeavor that brings learners into contact with powerful tools anddiscourses that unseat their individual and collective social oppressions. This pathway thus disturbs a conceptionICLS 2018 Proceedings481© ISLSof the learner as human capital in a fundamentally capitalist, unjust economic system (Sengupta-Irving, 2015),and troubles a conception of the learning sciences as moving people through such systems more efficiently. AsPhilip, Bang, and Jackson (2017) point out, thinking through equity involves asking not just how people learn butalso “for what,” “for whom,” and “with whom” learning takes place.Pathway #1 supports a deep fundamental reflection on what equitable learning moments, contexts, andsystems look and feel like. This reflection is philosophical, cultural, social, and historical, but it has immediateimplications for learning theory, design, and method, as discussed next. Scholars traversing this pathway help ustease out our evolving goals in justice-oriented learning sciences research. They also invite us to critique shallowconceptions of equity that stop at minoritized learners getting access to the otherwise-unaltered factory-modelclassroom. Instead, we too can engage in social dreaming about what an equitable world looks like and howsupporting learning can help us get there.Pathway #2: Theoretically, draw on existing critical social theoryInequitable educational practices take place and are reified at multiple levels: some are societal, national, andcultural while others are quite local, happening in the classroom or out-of-school learning environment. Thedimensions along which inequitable practices are organized of course varies from context to context. In the UnitedStates, for example, inequities persist towards individuals based on their race, religion, sexual orientation, gender,age, immigration status, dis/ability status, and other characteristics that should not be grounds for closing offlearning possibilities. Critical social theories include general theorizations of power and oppression as well asfeminist theories, critical theories of race, queer theory, critical dis/ability studies, decolonial studies, and others.Drawing on extant critical social theory is fruitful for at least three reasons. Firstly, understanding the complexcultural-historical roots of particular oppressed and power positions is necessary to create equitable learningenvironments that recognize the shared histories of particular groups without essentializing or stereotypinglearners. Secondly, while pluralism, multiculturalism, and diversity are key values, they are abstract; drawing oncritical social theory helps scholars explicitly name the kinds of injustice they are targeting (e.g., racism). Finally,employing specific social theory can be a way to address inequities across cultures, as discrimination does nottake equivalent forms with equal salience across contexts.LS has long theorized learning as a contextually-influenced activity. From a hierarchical understandingof context, critical social theory reveals that learners are not positioned by macro-contexts to have equal access toor be equally successful in learning micro-contexts. Moreover, a dialectical notion of context (e.g., Cole, 1996)reveals that inequitable learning moments are not merely consequences of societal injustice; such moments arealso constitutive of societal injustice.Critical social theories are seeing increased use in our field. McWilliams (2015) explicitly drew on queertheory to understand how fourth- and fifth-grade students engaged with understandings of gender beyond asimplistic binary. Curnow (2016) used feminist standpoint theory to make sense of how individuals of colorparticipated in an activist community and to critique the notion of “legitimate peripheral” participation whenfactors such as gender and race create discriminatory membership boundaries. Philip, Gupta, Elby, and Turpen(2017) draw upon Butler’s (2009) notion of the ungrievability of lives and Ahmed’s (2004) notion of “stickiness”to understand the participation patterns in a higher education classroom discussion on the ethics of drone warfare.Critical Race Theory (CRT; e.g., Ladson-Billings, 1998) has recently seen productive use in teacher educationscholarship in the learning and cognitive sciences (Larkin, Maloney, & Perry-Ryder, 2016), although its potentialhas yet to be fully leveraged in LS (Parsons, 2017). Pathways forward also exist that draw on poststructural racetheory (e.g., Shah & Leonardo, 2017), critical dis/ability studies (e.g., Smagorinsky, Cole, & Braga, 2017), andcritical theories of race (Nasir & Hand, 2006).In general, this pathway is characterized by explicit use of critical social theory to understand power andoppression at local and systemic levels (Esmonde & Booker, 2017). This scholarship appears particularlyproductive when it seeks to understand power generally as well as specifically with regard to particulardemographic identities. Pathway #2 clarifies our understanding of how people learn while carefully avoidingcultural stereotypes, opting instead for a robust treatment of identity that considers historical, legal, andcontemporary dehumanizations and discriminations towards particular groups. This pathway also offers potentialto “speak back” to the development of these critical social theories by advancing their rich theorizations oflearning and knowing processes.Pathway #3: Methodologically, focus on collaborative change-makingGiven the field’s methodological diversity and the damage-centered harmful methods that have characterizedmuch social science research (Tuck, 2009), methodology is a productive area around which to organize equitablescholarship. While by no means the only organizing framework for LS research, a hallmark of the field is design-ICLS 2018 Proceedings482© ISLSbased research (DBR; Design Based Research Collective, 2003). DBR draws on design experiments (Brown,1992) to understand the efficacy – and potential efficacy – of well-constructed learning activities andenvironments. Extending and modifying DBR has been a fruitful starting point for scholars seeking to developrobust methodologies that are explicitly focused on understanding how people learn while also centeringsustainable change-making and seeking equity. LS methodologies in service of justice need to fulfill at least twocriteria: they must (a) inform our study of how participants learn about or through equitable practice and (b) mustthemselves be equitable research practices. Although we can never disregard the importance of the researcher inenacting research that is just towards and directly benefits participants, these approaches may be particularlyeffective at fostering critical reflection on the part of the researchers and provide some ethical guidance.A focus on sustainable, systemic change-making characterizes methodologies that involve relevantstakeholders who have particular authority to influence learning environments. Design-based implementationresearch (DBIR) is one way to do this, as it focuses on bringing together insights from implementation researchand organizational change with those of the learning sciences (Penuel, Fishman, Cheng, & Sabelli, 2011). Relatedis the conceptualization of research-practice partnerships (RPPs; Coburn, Penuel, & Geil, 2013), which are “longterm, mutualistic collaborations between practitioners and researchers that are intentionally organized toinvestigate problems of practice and solutions for improving district outcomes” (p. 2). DBIR and RPPs have seennotable success by working towards change through sustainability in formal schooling settings; as approaches,they bring together those who are accorded power in educational settings (e.g., teachers, superintendents) withresearchers to support these changes in organizational cultures.In some contrast, another common approach to change-making in education research focuses specificallyon youth as stakeholders. Participatory action research (PAR; e.g., Cammarota & Fine, 2010) is an approach toresearch that foregrounds participants’ involvement in the research process, including questions asked, datacollected, and resultant action. For example, Kirshner, Pozzoboni, and Jones (2011) took up youth participatoryaction research to study how youth learn to manage bias (conceptualized as openness to disconfirming evidence)in a collaborative way. PAR can be a tool to ensure that research participants are represented in and benefit fromthe research. Clearly, participatory approaches are not a panacea – they do not by themselves equate to justpractices (Huf & Dennis, 2016). However, when PAR approaches focus on youth as agentic and reimaginesystems to empower them, PAR may be a compelling pathway to more equitable research practices.These values have emerged in other related approaches to DBR. Some scholars have focused on socialdesign experiments (e.g., Gutiérrez & Vossoughi, 2010), which employ DBR approaches while also explicitlyseeking social transformation by “creating a significant reorganization of systems of activity in which participantsbecoming designers of their own futures is an essential aim” (Gutiérrez & Jurow, 2016, p. 566). Still others havefocused on an adaption of “participatory design” as used in human-centered computing scholarship (DiSalvo, Yip,Bonsignore, & DiSalvo, 2017). Bang, Faber, Gurneau, Marin, and Soto (2016) conceptualized their work ascommunity-based design research, “a reworking of design-based research methods because it privileges andcenters the work in community, engages broad ranges of community members, and is driven by communitymembers in key project staff positions” (p. 31). These approaches focus on research as collaborative andempowering.A coalescing of these approaches is represented by the emergent conceptualization of such research asparticipatory design research (PDR). PDR draws on PAR, community-based design research, social designexperiments, DBIR, and more. PDR ultimately “maintains a commitment to advancing fundamental insights abouthuman learning and development through explicit attention to what forms of knowledge are generated, how, why,where and by whom” (Bang & Vossoughi, 2016, p. 175). PDR is an emergent “big tent” for methodologies thatseek equity through sustainable social change and learning that is collaboratively constructed and socollaboratively meaningful. PDR may be one of many potential pathways to counteract the harmful, damagecentered research that characterizes much social sciences research and particularly social science research onmarginalized populations (Tuck, 2009). How to conceptualize these commitments is still a work in progress forthis scholarship. Indeed, “It might be more appropriate to characterize PDR in its current state of development asan emerging field of research rather than a methodology (not to speak of method)” (Gutiérrez, Engeström, &Sannino, 2016, p. 281).The vastness of these approaches can be overwhelming. A focus on their differences, while important inconceptualization and practices, may obscure what they have in common: equity-oriented research cannot be donealone. Our research should be with rather than on folks (O’Kane, 2000), should take seriously the people itpurports to benefit, and requires a significant emotional and temporal investment on the part of multiple parties.This pathway has potential for supporting equitable practices and simultaneously adding to our knowledge abouthow people learn through scholarship that is deliberate, reflective, and slow (Mountz et al., 2015).ICLS 2018 Proceedings483© ISLSPathway #4: Support heterogeneity in ways of knowing and doingLS has long supported a multiplicity of ways of knowing and doing. For example, constructionist theory, rootedin a feminist critique of objectivity in science, focuses on facilitating learning environments that promoteepistemological pluralism, “accepting the validity of multiple ways of knowing and thinking” (Turkle & Papert,1990, p. 129). Recent work continues to value these ideas, suggesting that cultural and epistemologicalheterogeneity grows possibilities to learn and that such heterogeneity is a foundational consideration in learningtheory and design (Rosebery, Ogonowski, DiSchino, & Warren, 2010).This approach to criticality focuses on broadening participation by thinking about the ways, tools, andparticipation patterns of knowing in dominant discourse, and working to unseat that dominant discourse bycreating counter-narratives. This line of work seems particularly promising in STEM education, as scholars worktowards projects in which access to ideas is mediated by thoughtfully-designed cultural tools that critique existingbiases. For example, Pinkard, Erete, Martin, and McKinney de Roysten (2017) created the Digital Youth Divasproject, in which youth co-designed new narratives about science and technology that facilitated the engagementof girls from non-dominant backgrounds in digital making. Similarly, Beuchley, Peppler, Eisinberg, and Kafai(2013) illustrate that the use of electronic textiles introduced conductive thread and fabric to circuitry learning ina way that broadened access for women and improved conceptual understanding for all genders. These approacheswork in productive conversation with conceptions of identity as a joint accomplishment between a learner andtheir interaction with situated factors such as cultural tools (Hand & Gresalfi, 2015) and might support moreequitable disciplinary identification (e.g., Bell, Van Horne, & Cheng, 2017).In a related line of work, Medin and Bang (2014) have pointed out that a diversity of perspectives,approaches, and scientists results in higher-quality science across the field. However, “Underrepresentation inscience will never be remedied by better schools, better curricula, better teachers, and all other betters that leavescience itself as pure and beyond examination” (p. 240). Indeed, these approaches may be most effective whenthey focus on heterogeneity in people, tools, and discourses that are productive for learning in addition tofundamentally reexamining and broadening our understandings of disciplinary fields. This means encouragingthe peer-supported and interest-driven practices that youth engage in and making visible the connection betweenthese spheres and academic knowledge, as the connected learning initiative seeks to do (Ito et al., 2013). Theseconnections must be dialectical, involving shifts in how we think about individual interest and how we think aboutacademic knowledge.This pathway is particularly promising for the proximal goals of increasing learner participation indisciplines that have historically been hostile to them, which may in turn benefit the learner materially throughmore robust college and career prospects. A reconceptualization of tools and narratives is helpful because such anapproach tends to avoid deficit perspectives by focusing on factors that push out or limit participation. Theseapproaches are consonant with the larger projects of the learning sciences, which views learners’ prior social andcultural experiences as assets that themselves constitute learning practices and in turn can be leveraged to promoteacademic and institutional learning if this is the desired goal (Gutiérrez & Rogoff, 2003; Lee, 2001; Rose, 2004).Despite this, it is easy to stereotype large groups of people by assuming their presence in a space by itself createsheterogeneity without attending to the participation structures that also circulate in that space. Further, effectivework on reconceptualizing dominant tools, discourses, and practices must avoid assuming the same ways ofthinking, being, and doing are familiar or appealing to each member of a minoritized group, as this erases thevibrant heterogeneity within groups. Indeed, as Esmonde (2011) warns, even nuanced academic research risksthis essentialism if it fails to understand at a deep level how these social categories of interest are constructed andperformed. Focusing on specific critical social theory (Pathway #2) and designing with learners (Pathway #3)may help mitigate some of these risks.Discussion: Heterogeneity and quality in the critical Learning SciencesIt is my view that the support of epistemological and practical heterogeneity (Pathway #4) must apply not only tothe learners with whom we work, but to our own research and to the field of the learning sciences. Medin andBang (2014) argue, “Assuming that scientist diversity is correlated with diversity in methods and theoreticalorientations, we have a compelling reason to believe that scientist diversity makes for better science” (p. 234). Ibelieve this claim extends to the learning sciences, which surely benefit from heterogeneity in theory, method,and participants. As this paper has tried to show, there is not one “right” way to do equity-oriented learningresearch. Rather, there exist multiple pathways that have proximal and distal implications for unseatingdehumanizing power structures. I believe it is possible to traverse all four pathways simultaneously in a researchproject or program in its theory, method, and designs; it is an open question if the pathways can be meaningfullydisentangled, and the advantages and disadvantages of traversing one without the others remain unknown.ICLS 2018 Proceedings484© ISLSThis said, traversing these pathways is not a guarantee that research is equitable or in service of justice.There is always a risk of reifying the very structures we seek to challenge if we are not reflexive about who isbenefiting from our research and what high-quality equity-oriented research looks and feels like. Calling forheterogeneity is “not advocating an anything goes approach. To the contrary, this perspective advocates forintentional engagement of the heterogeneity that is ubiquitous in classrooms” (Rosebery et al., 2010, p. 327) andin our research. Quality always matters, and an attention to equity is by no means the only way, let alone aguarantee of, research quality.We have yet to fully conceptualize validity and quality across these threads. In my view, the generalvalidity criteria from our specific methods can sometimes still be applied to equity-oriented learning research. Inother places, openly ideological research may require ideas less frequently discussed in the field, such as whatLather (1986) and others refer to as catalytic validity, or “the degree to which the research process re-orients,focusses, and energizes participants in what Freire (1973) terms ‘conscientization,’ knowing reality in order tobetter transform it” (p. 67). Productive conversations across perspectives within equity-oriented learning researchwill surely be helpful for thinking about the quality of the work, just as it has been in educational research moregenerally (e.g., Moss et al., 2009). I conjecture that the language of “quality” will help us clarify what we as afield believe our trajectory should be. As Philip and Azevedo (2017) argue, “While all equity-oriented work isimportant, not all equity-oriented work is equal” (p. 525). Much more needs to be done to support how we thinkthrough effective critical learning sciences scholarship. What need it do for participants? What need it contributeto our knowledge of how people learn? How should it account for researcher positionality? A diversity ofapproaches and researchers will surely deepen this conversation.ConclusionGiven the growth of critical learning sciences research in recent years, it is possible to read this paper as a critiqueof work in the field that does not fit into these pathways. To some degree this is reasonable, but I do not intendthese pathways to be an exhaustive taxonomy of such research; indeed, much high-quality equity-orientedresearch does not (and should not) fit neatly into one of these dimensions. Furthermore, a focus on criticality andjustice is not a critique of the learning sciences writ large. Indeed, scholars who do equity-oriented work haveused core ideas from the learning sciences to develop their approaches. Thus, the learning sciences has a role toplay in lending something quite fruitful to equity-oriented goals. With this in mind, a focus by many on equityshould not be interpreted as an indictment but rather as a generative critique (J. Lester, personal communication,November 14, 2017) of the field.As I have demonstrated, the study of injustice and learning is being done robustly and is evenfoundational to the learning sciences. But it is my hope that LS has only just begun to contend with the role ofjustice in the learning process. For example, more work should be done to test if our theoretical infrastructure isrobust enough to account for the deep historical injustices that surely color learning contexts. For the moment “itis not clear what the affordances are in shifting from a sociocultural to a sociopolitical analysis of learning […]versus employing a more expansive sociocultural analysis that attends to the sociopolitical as well” (Gutiérrez,Engeström, & Sannino, 2016, p. 278). We might also continue our conversations about quality and heterogeneityin equity-oriented learning research. As scholars continue to tread these pathways and as they increasinglyintersect, we may indeed develop newer theorizations of not only when and where people learn, but the verymechanisms of how people learn. These pathways forward are promising, for, just as in the early days of the field,“The failures are sure to outnumber the successes by a goodly margin, making it certain that [we] will never runout of interesting things to do” (Cole, 1996, p. 350).ReferencesAhmed, S. (2004). The cultural politics of emotion. New York, NY: Routledge.Bang, M. (2017). Towards an ethic of decolonial trans-ontologies in sociocultural theories of learning anddevelopment. In I. Esmonde & A. N. Booker (Eds.). Power and privilege in the learning sciences:Critical and sociocultural theories of learning. New York, NY: Routledge.Bang, M., & Vossoughi, S. (Eds.). (2016). Participatory design research and educational justice: Studying learningand relations within social change making [Special issue]. Cognition and Instruction, 34(3).Bang, M., Faber, L., Gurneau, J., Marin, A., & Soto, C. (2016). Community-based design research: Learningacross generations and strategic transformations of institutional relations toward axiological innovations.Mind, Culture, and Activity, 23(1), 28-41.Bell, P., Van Horne, K., & Cheng, B. H. (Eds.). (2017). Designing learning environments for equitabledisciplinary identification [Special issue]. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 26(3).Biesta, G. (2013). Interrupting the politics of learning. Power and Education, 5(1), 4-15.ICLS 2018 Proceedings485© ISLSBooker, A., Vossoughi, S., & Hooper, P. (2014). Tensions and possibilities for political work in the learningsciences. In J. Polman, E. Kyza, D. K. O’Neill, I. Tabak, W. R. Penuel, A. S. Jurow, T. Lee, & L.D’Amico (Eds.), International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) 2014, Volume 2. Boulder,CO: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Brown, A. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.Buechley, L., Peppler, K., Eisenberg, M., & Kafai, Y. (Eds.). (2013). Textile messages: Dispatches from the worldof e-textiles and education. New York, NY: Peter Lang.Butler, J. (2009). Frames of war: When is life grievable? New York, NY: Verso Books.Cammarota, J., & Fine, M. (Eds.). (2010). Revolutionizing education: Youth participatory action research inmotion. Routledge.Coburn, C. E., Penuel, W. R., & Geil, K. E. (2013). Practice partnerships: A strategy for leveraging research foreducational improvement in school districts. William T. Grant Foundation.Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Harvard University Press.Curnow, J. (2016). Situated learning, situated knowledge: Situating racialization, colonialism, and patriarchywithin communities of practice In Looi, C. K., Polman, J. L., Cress, U., and Reimann, P. (Eds.).Transforming learning, empowering learners: The International Conference of the Learning Sciences(ICLS) 2016, Volume 1. Singapore: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Design-Based Research Collective. (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educationalinquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5-8.DiSalvo, B., Yip, J., Bonsignore, E., & DiSalvo, C. (Eds.). (2017). Participatory design for learning: Perspectivesfrom practice and research. Taylor & Francis.Esmonde, I. (2011). Snips and snails and puppy dogs’ tails: Genderism and mathematics education. For theLearning of Mathematics, 31(2), 27-31.Esmonde, I., & Booker, A. N. (2017). Power and privilege in the learning sciences; Critical and socioculturaltheories of learning. New York, NY: Routledge.Espinoza, M. L., & Vossoughi, S. (2014). Perceiving learning anew: Social interaction, dignity, and educationalrights. Harvard Educational Review, 84(3), 285-313.Gutiérrez, K. D. (2008). Developing a sociocritical literacy in the third space. Reading Research Quarterly, 43(2),148-164.Gutiérrez, K. D., Engeström, Y., & Sannino, A. (2016). Expanding educational research and interventionistmethodologies. Cognition and Instruction, 34(3), 275-284.Gutiérrez, K. D., and Jurow, A. S. (2016). Social design experiments: Toward equity by design. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 25(4), 565-598.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Rogoff, B. (2003). Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits or repertoires of practice.Educational Researcher, 32(5), 19-25.Gutiérrez, K. D., & Vossoughi, S. (2010). Lifting off the ground to return anew: Mediated praxis, transformativelearning, and social design experiments. Journal of Teacher Education, 61(1-2), 100-117.Hand, V., & Gresalfi, M. (2015). The joint accomplishment of identity. Educational Psychologist, 50(3), 190203.Huf. C., & Dennis, B. (2016). Children as researchers?: Methodological considerations on participation in thecontext of childhood studies. Oxford Education and Ethnography Conference. Oxford, U.K.Ito, M., Gutierrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., ... & Watkins, S. C. (2013). Connectedlearning: An agenda for research and design. Digital Media and Learning Research Hub. Available at:http://dmlhub.net/publications/connected-learning-agenda-for-research-and-design/Kirshner, B., Pozzoboni, K., & Jones, H. (2011). Learning how to manage bias: A case study of youth participatoryaction research. Applied Developmental Science, 15(3), 140-155.Ladson-Billings, G. (1998). Just what is critical race theory and what's it doing in a nice field likeeducation? International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 11(1), 7-24.Larkin, D.B., Maloney, T., & Perry-Ryder, G. (2016). Reasoning about race and pedagogy in two preservicescience teachers: A critical race theory analysis. Cognition and Instruction, 34(4), 285-322.Lather, P. (1986). Issues of validity in openly ideological research: Between a rock and a soft place.Interchange, 17(4), 63-84.Lee, C. D. (2001). Is October Brown Chinese? A cultural modeling activity system for underachieving students.American Educational Research Journal, 38(1), 97-141.McWilliams, J. (2015). Trans∗Literacies: Designing for gender fluency and transmedia literacy in the elementaryclassroom. (unpublished doctoral dissertation), Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.ICLS 2018 Proceedings486© ISLSMedin, D. L., & Bang, M. (2014). Who's asking?: Native science, western science, and science education. MITPress.Moss, P. A., Phillips, D. C., Erickson, F. D., Floden, R. E., Lather, P. A., & Schneider, B. L. (2009). Learningfrom our differences: A dialogue across perspectives on quality in education research. EducationalResearcher, 38(7), 501-517.Mountz, A., Bonds, A., Mansfield, B., Loyd, J., Hyndman, J., Walton-Roberts, M., ... & Curran, W. (2015). Forslow scholarship: A feminist politics of resistance through collective action in the neoliberal university.ACME: An International Journal for Critical Geographies, 14(4), 1235-1259.Nasir, N. I. S., & Hand, V. M. (2006). Exploring sociocultural perspectives on race, culture, and learning. Reviewof Educational Research, 76(4), 449-475.Nasir, N. I. S., Rosebery, A. S., Warren, B., & Lee, C. D. (2014). Learning as a cultural process: Achieving equitythrough diversity. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 686-706).Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.O’Kane, C. (2000) The development of participatory techniques: Facilitating children’s views about decisionswhich affect them. In P. Christensen & A. James (Eds.), Research with children: Perspectives andpractices (pp. 136-159). London, UK: Falmer Press.Parsons, E. R. C. (2017). Interfaces between critical race theory and sociocultural perspectives. In I. Esmonde &A. N. Booker (Eds.), Power and privilege in the learning sciences: Critical and sociocultural theoriesof learning. New York, NY: Routledge.Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development at theintersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331–337.Philip, T. M., & Azevedo, F. S. (2017). Everyday science learning and equity: Mapping the contested terrain.Science Education, 101, 526-532.Philip, T. M., Bang, M, & Jackson, K. (2017). Articulating the “how,” the “for what,” the “for whom,” and the“with whom” in concert: A call to broaden the benchmarks of our scholarship. Cognition and Instruction.Advance online publication. http://www.tandfonline.com/toc/hcgi20/currentPhilip, T. M., Gupta, A., Elby, A., & Turpen, C. (2017). Why ideology matters for learning: A case of ideologicalconvergence in an engineering ethics classroom discussion on drone warfare. Journal of the LearningSciences. Advance online publication. http://www.tandfonline.com/toc/hlns20/currentPinkard, N., Erete, S., Martin, C. K., & McKinney de Royston, M. (2017). Digital youth divas: Exploringnarrative-driven curriculum to spark middle school girls’ interest in computational activities. Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 26(3), 477-516.Politics of Learning Writing Collective (2017). The Learning Sciences in a new era of US nationalism. Cognition& Instruction 35(2), 91-102.Rose, M. (2004). The mind at work: Valuing the intelligence of the American worker. Penguin.Rosebery, A. S., Ogonowski, M., DiSchino, M., & Warren, B. (2010). “The coat traps all your body heat”:Heterogeneity as fundamental to learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19(3), 322-357.Sengupta-Irving, T. (2015, November). “Tell them we are rising: Serving more than a pipeline through humanisticSTEM learning.” In S. Vossoughi, C. Malsbary & F. Erickson (Chairs), What is an anthropology oflearning?: Revisiting the past to shape the future. Proceedings of the 114th American AnthropologicalAssociation Meeting: Denver, CO.Shah, N. & Leonardo, Z. (2017). Learning discourses of race and mathematics in classroom interaction: Apoststructural perspective. In I. Esmonde & A. N. Booker (Eds.), Power and privilege in the learningsciences: Critical and sociocultural theories of learning. New York, NY: Routledge.Smagorinsky, P., Cole, M., & Braga, L. W. (2017). In I. Esmonde & A. N. Booker (Eds.), Power and privilege inthe learning sciences: Critical and sociocultural theories of learning. New York, NY: Routledge.Tabak, I., & Radinsky, J (Eds.). (2014). Social justice research in the learning sciences [Special issue]. Journal ofthe Learning Sciences, 23(3).Tuck, E. (2009). Suspending damage: A letter to communities. Harvard Educational Review, 79(3), 409-428.Turkle, S., & Papert, S. (1990). Epistemological pluralism: Styles and voices within the computer culture. Signs:Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 16(1), 128-157.Vossoughi, S. (2015). Intellectual respect: Envisioning alternative educational possibilities. Equity Alliance Blog.Retrieved from http://niusileadscape.org/bl/shirin-vossoughi/Whyte, K. P. (2013). Justice forward: Tribes, climate adaptation and responsibility. Climatic Change, 120(3),517-530.ICLS 2018 Proceedings487© ISLS