Examining the Role of Explicit Epistemic Reflection in PromotingStudents’ Learning From Digital TextFeng Lin, Dana Gnesdilow, Nicole D. Martin, Catherine L. Dornfeld Tissenbaum, and Sadhana Puntambekarfeng.lin@wisc.edu, gnesdilow@wisc.edu, ndmartin@wisc.edu, cldornfeld@wisc.edu,puntambekar@education.wisc.eduUniversity of Wisconsin-MadisonAbstract: This study examined whether and how epistemic reflection embedded in students’use of a digital tool influenced their learning using the tool. One biology teacher and his fourclasses of 8th graders (N = 100) participated in this study. Students used a digital text tool,VidyaMap, to learn about photosynthesis and energy transformation. Two classes wereprovided prompts for epistemic reflection. The prompts encouraged students to reflect on theepistemic role of the tool for inquiry. The other two classes served as comparison groups andused the tool without epistemic reflection prompts. Quantitative analysis showed that theclasses that received the epistemic reflection prompts outperformed the comparison classes intheir learning. We also coded the levels of students’ epistemic reflection and found that it wascorrelated with students’ science learning from the tool. Qualitative analyses further suggestedhow students with high and low epistemic reflection scores differed in their inquiry using thetool. Implications of findings are discussed.IntroductionSince Perry’s work (1970), epistemic cognition, understanding of the nature of knowledge and knowing, hasattracted much attention in research. Epistemology examines the origin, nature, methods, and justification ofhuman knowledge (Hofer & Bendixen, 2012; Hofer & Pintrich, 2002). Over the years, researchers have adopteda psychological approach to examine individual’s epistemology, focusing on what individuals believe is thenature of knowledge and knowing (Hofer & Pintrich, 1997; Khine, 2008). Accumulated evidence has shown therole of epistemic cognition in students’ learning processes and outcomes (Cano, 2005; Mason, 2010; Mason,Ariasi, & Boldrin, 2011; Qian & Alvermann, 1995; Schommer, 1990). However, much of the research wasbased on self-reported questionnaire for examining students’ epistemic understanding, which has been criticizedfor its decontextualized nature (Mason et al., 2011) and limited explanatory power (Sandoval, 2012). Morerecent literature has called for studying epistemic cognition from a situative perspective (Chinn, Buckland, &Samarapungavan, 2011; Louca, Elby, Hammer, & Kagey, 2004; Sandoval, 2012). The situated view argues thatepistemic cognitions are situated and context-dependent (Chinn et al., 2011; Louca et al., 2004), and that they“emerge from and are linked to particular forms of activity” (Sandoval, 2012). Given the situated nature ofepistemic cognition, it is possible that students possess certain epistemic ideas, but they are not activated incertain contexts (Louca et al., 2004), which may influence how they learn. Therefore, an important question toask is, how can we design epistemic support to activate students’ epistemic cognition, and will this support helpstudents learn better? This study will address this issue in a context where digital tools are used.With the widespread use of technology in education, digital tools are commonly used for supportingstudents’ inquiry and learning. Many of these tools have been designed with epistemological underpinnings thatmay not be obvious to or taken up by learners. Therefore, students may not use the tool as intended, whichmight influence their learning. In this study, our aim is to examine whether engaging students in epistemicreflection, that is, providing students with opportunities to reflect on the epistemic role of tools used to supportscience inquiry, could improve their learning. We adopted the term epistemic reflection from Mason et al.(2011), who examined students' spontaneous thinking about knowledge and knowing. But here, we use it torefer to the intervention process of activating students’ thinking about knowledge and knowing. In this case it isto explicitly engage students in reflecting on the epistemic role of a digital tool for their inquiry. Engagingstudents in such a process might influence how they actually engage in inquiry in that context, and thereforeinfluence their learning. Our work builds on previous studies that emphasized the importance of making theepistemic aspects of students’ inquiry explicit (Lin & Chan, 2018; Sandoval & Reiser, 2004; Schauble, Glaser,Duschl, Schulze, & John, 1995). For example, Sandoval and Reiser (2004) designed epistemic scaffolds tostructure students’ inquiry activities within ExplanationConstructor (an electronic journal that students used torecord their investigations). Their aim was to help students attend to the epistemic features of scientificexplanations, including articulation of coherent, causal accounts, and use of data to support causal claims. Theyfound that such an epistemic tool was helpful for improving students’ inquiry. Schauble and colleagues (1995)ICLS 2018 Proceedings240© ISLSfound that 5th grade students designed better experiments after instruction on the purpose of experimentation.These studies suggested the importance of making epistemic goals and epistemic aspects of students’ inquiryexplicit. The current study builds on this line of research. To help students attend to the epistemic features of thetool, we used explicit epistemic reflection prompts in an attempt to activate students’ cognition about theepistemic role of a digital tool for inquiry and examined its effect on students’ learning using the tool.The particular digital tool we focused on in this study is VidyaMap. VidyaMap uses both concept mapsand text to facilitate students’ navigation and inquiry (Puntambekar & Stylianou, 2005)[see Figure 1]. Theconcept maps display the connections between science ideas, which mirrors the interrelated structure of thescience concepts and phenomenon. Underlying this design is the epistemic idea that scientific knowledge iscoherent and connected. This epistemic feature of VidyaMap was designed to help students engage in deeperand more sustained inquiry, as the connection of concepts could be used to guide and expand students’ inquiryby helping them generate more questions and leading them from one idea to another. However, students may notunderstand this epistemic feature of the tool and the underlying design principles, and therefore may not use itas intended. Therefore, we developed epistemic reflection prompts to activate students' epistemic awareness ofthis feature to see if it would affect their learning from their inquiry using the tool. To examine the effects of theepistemic prompts on students' learning, we also included a comparison group who were not given prompts forepistemic reflection while using the tool.In addition to exploring the effects of epistemic reflection on students’ learning from using VidyaMap,we examined whether and how the levels of students’ epistemic reflection may be related to the depth of theirlearning. Previous studies have suggested that students’ epistemic understanding is related to their conceptualunderstanding (Qian & Alvermann, 1995; Schommer, 1990), but many of them were based on adecontextualized questionnaire approach for examining epistemic cognition. This study will take a situatedperspective to examine epistemic cognition by looking at students’ reflections of the epistemic role of the digitaltool for inquiry, and examine the relationship between epistemic reflections and student’s learning from usingthe digital tool. We will also explore how students with different levels of epistemic reflection engage in inquiryusing the digital text tool.Three research questions are addressed in this study:1) Does the process of engaging students in epistemic reflection improve students’ learning when using thedigital text tool?2) What is the relationship between students' level of epistemic reflection and their learning?3) How do students with different levels of epistemic reflection engage in inquiry using the digital tool?Figure 1. An example of a navigation page on VidyaMap.MethodsParticipants and contextOne experienced biology teacher and his four classes of 8th grade students participated in this study. Each of thefour classes was randomly assigned to one of the two conditions: epistemic reflection condition and nonepistemic reflection condition. Students in two classes (n=49) were provided with epistemic prompts (epistemicreflection condition), and the other two classes served as comparison classes (n= 51) (non-epistemic reflectioncondition). Despite the fact that the classes were randomly assigned to one of the conditions, each student wasICLS 2018 Proceedings241© ISLSnot randomly assigned to a particular condition, which made this a quasi-experimental design. This studyoccurred during students' regularly scheduled science classes in a Mid-sized Midwestern city in the U.S.A. Thestudy was conducted within a larger research project that examined how engaging students in a curriculumfocused on solving 21st century bio-engineering problems would help them learn science. In one of the units,Make Your Own Compost!, students needed to use information they learned about energy transformation, mattercycling, ecosystems, decomposition and human impacts on the environment to solve the challenge. Thus, all theparticipants were involved in solving a design challenge to reduce the amount of waste going into landfills bydesigning compost that breaks down quickly and contains lots of nutrients. Students worked in groups of threeto four students throughout the unit and participated in cycles of inquiry which included research usingsimulation and physical experiments, as well as second-hand research (Palincsar & Magnusson, 2001) using adigital text tool, VidyaMap. Throughout the unit, every student wrote notes in his or her scientist’s journal,which was a paper-and-pencil tool that included prompts associated with each activity, such as writinghypotheses, collecting data, interpreting results, and reasoning. The journal both served both as a scaffold, aswell as a place for students to record their ideas.ProcedureAbout halfway through the unit, students were engaged in a mini-unit to help them understand the role thatplants play in the transformation of energy in ecosystems. Students were asked to: 1) brainstorm their ideasabout what plants need to grow, which they recorded in their journals and served as prior ideas for our analysis;2) write questions they had about plants' role in energy transformation in ecosystems; and 3) use VidyaMap toresearch their questions. Students' notes from their research on VidyaMap were recorded in their studentjournals and served as their post ideas for our analysis. It should be noted that all students had used VidyaMapbefore this session, and thus they were familiar with the concept map structure of the interface.The prompts were given after students’ brainstorming of ideas and before their generation of questionsand use of VidyaMap. For the epistemic reflection condition, each student was provided with a worksheetcontaining three questions: 1) You already have some experience with VidyaMap, what do you think about therole of the maps (left side of the screen) in VidyaMap? 2) Did the maps help you? What did they help you with?3) How can the connections between nodes in the maps help you with your research? They were first asked toreflect and write their ideas about these three questions on the worksheet. Then they were asked to discuss thesequestions in small groups for 10-15 minutes. Students were able to revise their responses to the questions basedon their discussion. A similar procedure was followed in the comparison classes (non-epistemic reflectioncondition), except that we gave them a general prompt: What do you want to learn from VidyaMap?MeasuresStudents’ learning from textTo examine students’ learning from text, we analyzed students’ pre- and post- ideas in their journals. Studentswrote what they knew about plants in their journals before their use of VidyaMap, these ideas were analyzed aspre-ideas. They also wrote what they learned after their investigation with VidyaMap in their journals. Theseresponses were analyzed as post ideas. We analyzed these pre- and post-ideas with a coding scheme focusing onthe extent to which the students discussed the concepts of photosynthesis and energy transformation. Theconcepts students learned from engaging in these photosynthesis activities were an essential part of the Compostunit, because students needed to understand the role that plants play in transforming energy and cycling matterin an ecosystem to solve the challenge. The coding scheme was inductively developed. For this rubric, theconcept of photosynthesis included 6 sub-ideas and energy transformation included 2 sub-ideas, as Table 1shows. We counted the number of sub-ideas included in each student’s pre- and post-written responsesaccording to the rubric. The total number of sub-ideas included in each response was summed to represent thethoroughness of their ideas about photosynthesis and energy transformation. Thirty percent of the students'journal entries from their VidyaMap session were individually coded by the first and second authors. Cohen’sKappa was K = .77, indicating good agreement. The first author coded the remaining responses.Table 1: Coding scheme for pre- and post-ideasConceptPhotosynthesis (max6 points)ICLS 2018 ProceedingsSub-Ideasincluded sun/sunlight, water, and oxygen as input for photosynthesisincluded oxygen as output for photosynthesisincluded glucose/chemical energy/food/carbohydrates as output for photosynthesis242© ISLSEnergyTransformation(max 2 points)explained the role of stomata in photosynthesisexplained the role of chlorophyll/chloroplast in photosynthesisexplained the role of root/leave/stem in photosynthesisconnected plants with sun/sunlight for energy transformation, or state that plants play animportant role in energy transformationconnected plants with the rest of the ecosystem (e.g., provide food for consumers)*The maximum score that could be earned was 8.Students’ reflection on the epistemic role of VidyaMapTo examine students’ epistemic cognition embedded in their epistemic reflection, we analyzed students’ writtenresponses on their prompts worksheet, which served as both an intervention and a measurement. We codedthese responses according to their levels of understanding about the epistemic role of VidyaMap. For ourpurpose in this study, we described a more sophisticated epistemic reflection as one that showed a betterunderstanding of the epistemic role of VidyaMap for sustained inquiry, e.g., how the connections between thenodes in the concept maps might help them expand their ideas for further inquiry. A less sophisticated reflectionshowed a more superficial understanding about the function of the tool, e.g., it provides content knowledge.Each student’s responses to the three questions were grouped together and coded. Three levels of epistemicreflection were identified as follows in Table 2 below. Thirty percent of the students’ epistemic reflectionresponses were individually coded by the first and second authors. Cohen’s Kappa was K = .69, indicating goodagreement. The first author coded the remaining responses.Table 2. Coding scheme for epistemic reflectionLevel ofResponse0DescriptionUnintelligible responses1Described VidyaMap as tool to findcontent knowledge and details2Described connections in VidyaMap asimportant, but did not discuss the roleof connection forinquiry/understandingDescribed importance of connectionsin VidyaMap for inquiry to includeexpanding ideas, leading one subject toanother, spurring more questions,which were beyond findinginformation/answers3Student Example*1) It’s the food or (mabbs) to more of the plant parts.2) Yes itshowed me what to do. 3) If you click it it tells you?1)I think they are really helpful when it comes to the research partof the project. It gives us the background information. 2)It helpedme with finding specific details. 3)It gives us the definition of therole all of the objects …1) The role is to show how the maps are all connected and theyall spread. 2) Yes helped me see that they are all connected to one[main] thing producers. 3) to show that they are all connected toone thing.1)It helps you find the [origin] of the node. 2)Yes, It helped us getmore questions and answers. 3)It lets us know [there is] moreparts of it instead of just one answer. ….It helps you realize thatthere are connections between them all. Each thing leads up toanother + back sometimes to one main thing. It really helped merealize info[information], that I wasn’t yet aware of.*We bolded words in students' examples to highlight key parts of response in relation to the rubric.Small group inquiry during navigationStudents’ small group discussions during their investigation on VidyaMap were qualitatively analyzed tounderstand how students with different levels of epistemic reflection may engage in inquiry differently using thetool. We selected two contrasting groups based on their epistemic reflection scores (one high and one lowepistemic reflection group) as well as availability of video data. The groups’ epistemic reflection scores werecalculated by averaging the epistemic reflection scores of all students in the group. Contrasting cases analysis(Rummel & Hmelo-Silver, 2008) was conducted to examine their inquiry practice using the tool.ResultsComparing students’ learning gains between conditionsWe first conducted a t-test to compare students’ prior biology knowledge in both conditions (epistemicreflection vs non-epistemic reflection condition) using a content test to examine if there were significantdifferences between the groups. All students took the Compost content knowledge test before the start of theCompost unit, which measured what they knew about energy transformation, matter cycling, decomposition,ecosystems, and human impacts on the planet. The test included 22 multiple choice questions and 4 open-endedICLS 2018 Proceedings243© ISLSquestions. We found that students within each condition had similar levels of biology content knowledge at thestart of the unit (t = -1.197, p = .234). By establishing that students in both conditions started out with similarlevels of content knowledge, we could then assume that the results of our analyses were likely not due todifferences in students' prior knowledge.We then conducted an ANCOVA to examine if the students in the epistemic reflection condition hadhigher post-idea scores than the students in the non-epistemic reflection condition after controlling for theirprior idea scores. The assumption of homogeneity was met. The result showed that the students in the epistemicreflection condition (adjusted mean = 3.26 (SE = .282)) had significantly higher post-idea scores than thestudents in the non-epistemic reflection condition group (adjusted mean = 2.36 (SE = .279)), F (1, 94) = 4.98, p< .05) when controlling prior idea scores. This suggested that students from the epistemic reflection conditionlearned more from VidyaMap than students from comparison condition.The relationship between epistemic reflection and students’ learning outcomesTo understand whether students’ epistemic understanding of the online tool in their reflections was related totheir learning, we conducted a correlation analysis to examine the relationship between students' epistemicreflection scores and their post- idea learning scores. The results showed that they were significantly positivelycorrelated (r = .316, p <. 05), suggesting that more sophisticated epistemic reflection was associated with abetter learning outcome.Students’ inquiry during navigationTo understand how epistemic reflection was related to students’ inquiry and learning, we compared thediscourse of two contrasting groups from the epistemic reflection condition: high and low epistemic reflectiongroup. The average epistemic reflection scores of all groups ranged from 1 to 3. We chose the highest (M = 3)and the second lowest one (M = 1.5) as the contrasting groups as the video data of the lowest one was notavailable. The Critical Incident technique (Flanagan, 1954) was used to identify excerpts from the groups’discourse that best exemplified the different types of epistemic practice of the contrasting groups as theyconducted inquiries on VidyaMap. Overall, we found that students’ in the high and low epistemic groupsengaged in qualitatively different inquiries, which aligned with their respective epistemic reflections. In thefollowing, we present excerpts from both groups that illustrated how they differed in their inquiry practice. Thefollowing is an episode from the high epistemic reflection group:S2: Like yesterday…We found energy transformation taking sunlight and converting it into chemicalenergy. SoS1: How do they transform energy? How do they provide energy for the other animals?S2: So we should go to photosynthesis right?…S2: [reading VidyaMap page] It says, uhm, the- there’s sunlight needed to combine with the nutrientsto produce sugars for the plants to grow.S3: Wait!S1: That’s growth, that’s not energy.S3: [pointing to the VidyaMap page] What is that? What is that? Chloroplat- plast.S2: Click on it.S1: I did.S3: Of the plant cells and theS2: Oh it makes cell membranes like, right there there’s one in the map.S3: Ok. So, this thingy is- oh yeah that’s the one I was talking about! The one that turns the plantsgreen.…S2: Mhmm. But we know- we have to know… why do they transform, energy? So we gotta go back toproducers.This excerpt shows how this high epistemic reflection group decided their navigation direction basedon their prior understandings and questions they wanted to know, and how they made use of the epistemicfeature of the tool (connection of concepts) to expand their ideas. As the excerpt shows, while S2 was readingICLS 2018 Proceedings244© ISLSaloud about the process of photosynthesis on VidyaMap, S3 noted a related concept (chloroplast) from thevisualization of the concept map on VidyaMap, which prompted the group to learn more about chloroplasts.Later the group was wondering how and why plants make sugar. While S1 was navigating, S2 notedsome related information on VidyaMap:S2: [pointing to VidyaMap page] Right there. It says um photosynthesis is the ability to convertsunlight into carbon and sugars- ((continues reading text from VidyaMap))S4: (inaudible)S2: For energy.S1: ((reading quietly))S2: Go to carbohydrates…S2: [talking to S3] What do you think?S3: Well I just read that um energy cannot be created or destroyed so plants can’t create energyinstead they (transform) the energy.S2: From the sun light, chemical energy. Perfect. ….. ((writing notes and thinking aloud)) Plants can’tcreate energy but it is transformedThis excerpt showed how this high epistemic reflection group navigated to different related conceptsguided by their emerging questions, and how they connected each other’s ideas (S2 built upon S3’s ideas), andcame to understand the relationship between plants and energy transformation.In contrast, the low epistemic reflection students did not use any questions to guide their inquiry, eventhough they were asked to do so. They often simply opened a VidyaMap page, one student read aloud, and therest of the group followed and recorded the information in their journals. For example, in the beginning of asession, the group opened a page on producers:S1: [reading a VidyaMap page] Plants use the nitrogen and the carbon, well the plants, take, in,carbon and water, and nitrogen that is found in the water, they break down the nitrogen so thatother plants can use it.S2: So what are we writing down?S1: Take, taking –S2: Carbon –S1: Water. Water slash…S2: Carbon then what?S1: Carbon, and turn the, turn the nitrogen into usable nitrogen. Carbons into, turn the nitrogenatoms…into usable nitrogen…for other animals. And turn, carbon…into, into food and oxygen.After a while, another student learned something from another VidyaMap page, and read aloud “Plantsare able to make their own food, cause that’s, that’s what they do.” He jotted down these notes, and everyoneelse in the group also recorded this information in their journal. At times, one student even explicitly toldeveryone to copy the information he found:S3: [pointing to a graph in a VidyaMap page] So does everyone write down these four things?S4: Yes.S3: Have you?S1: Two of them.S3: Write it down.S4: Come on dude.S1: Okay ((mumbling)).…S3: [Reading a VidyaMap page] So six carbon dioxides and six water, plus sunlight…is that equal?One carbon, one carbohydrate and six oxygen. Yeah it does. So write everyone, write this down.Write that equation down. Six, so write underneath your papers…S4: That means you too XX,ICLS 2018 Proceedings245© ISLSAs these examples show, the high epistemic reflection group used VidyaMap as an epistemic tool tosupport and expand their question-driven inquiry, and they actively connected their previous ideas as well aseach other’s ideas for constructing new understanding. However, the low epistemic reflection group merelyused VidyaMap as a tool to provide information and did not capitalize on the epistemic features of the tool tohelp them connect and expand their ideas. Their navigation on VidyaMap was fragmented. They neitherconnected their search with any research questions nor to their previous ideas. They just copied what waswritten on VidyaMap and did not process nor connect each other’s ideas. Such differences in inquiry practicebetween these two groups were aligned with the difference in their epistemic reflection.DiscussionIn this study, we examined the role of embedded epistemic reflection in students’ learning from digital text.Drawing from the previous research emphasizing the situated nature of epistemic cognition (Chinn et al., 2011;Sandoval, 2012), we designed explicit epistemic reflection prompts to activate students’ cognition about theepistemic role of an online tool for inquiry and examined its impact on students’ learning and inquiry using thetool. We specifically addressed three questions: 1) Does the process of engaging students in epistemic reflectionimprove students’ learning when using the digital text tool? 2) Is there a relationship between students' levels ofepistemic reflection and their learning from using the tool? and 3) How do students with different levels ofepistemic reflection engage in inquiry using this tool?In traditional classrooms, science has generally been presented as a collection of unrelated facts andideas. VidyaMap was intentionally designed to display the connections between science concepts and ideas inconcept maps. These maps can be used by students to help them to see how science concepts are related and tosupport their navigation in the tool for sustained inquiry. However, this epistemic feature is not always obviousto students. Our study showed that having students explicitly reflect on the epistemic role of the tool betterpromoted their learning when using it.Research over the past few decades has been focused on understanding the nature (e.g., dimensionality)of epistemic cognition and its relation to other constructs. Few studies have examined how epistemic supportcould be designed in a certain context, and how it may impact students’ learning. Our study was situated in acollaborative learning environment where a digital tool was used. Our findings suggest that helping studentsunderstand the epistemic nature of the tool by providing reflection prompts may be a promising way to promotestudents’ inquiry and learning. This finding aligns with previous studies (Sandoval & Reiser, 2004) thatemphasized the importance of scaffolding the epistemic aspects of students’ inquiry. It also sheds light on a newway to provide explicit epistemic support in a context where a digital tool is used to impact students’ learning.To further understand the relationship between students’ understanding of the epistemic role of the tooland their learning, we conducted a correlation analysis to examine the relationship between the students’epistemic reflection scores and their post- science ideas. Consistent with the previous research (Mason et al.,2011; Qian & Alvermann, 1995; Stathopoulou & Vosniadou, 2007), we found that these two variables werepositively correlated. This result confirmed the importance of helping students engage in epistemic reflection tosupport their learning.In examining how students' epistemic reflection might influence their inquiry and learning, we focusedon how two contrasting groups with high- and low-level epistemic reflections pursued their inquiries usingVidyaMap. We found that the group with a higher-level epistemic reflection attended more to the epistemic roleof the tool, and used the connection of nodes to expand their inquiry. They also connected what they knew, whatthey wanted to know, as well as to each other’s ideas during their discussion. In contrast, the group with lowerlevel of epistemic reflection did not attend to the epistemic feature of the tool, and simply used VidyaMap as atool to provide content knowledge. This result showed that students’ understanding of the epistemic features ofthe tool aligned with their use of it. This is consistent with the previous studies on the relationship betweenepistemic cognition and learning process (Cano, 2005; Cho, Woodward, & Li, 2017). Many of these previousstudies are based on questionnaire measures, our study provided further evidence by examining epistemiccognition from a situated perspective and illustrated how students’ epistemic reflection might be related to theirinquiry and learning while they used VidyaMap. It is possible that our epistemic prompts activated students’cognition about the epistemic role of the tool, which influenced their inquiry during navigation, and thereforetheir learning using the tool. Future research could further examine this relationship and test it in a differentcontext.ReferencesICLS 2018 Proceedings246© ISLSCano, F. (2005). Epistemological beliefs and approaches to learning: Their change through secondary schooland their influence on academic performance. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 75, 203-221.Chinn, C. A., Buckland, L. A., & Samarapungavan, A. L. A. (2011). Expanding the dimensions of epistemiccognition: Arguments from philosophy and psychology. Educational Psychologist, 46(3), 141-167.Cho, B.-Y., Woodward, L., & Li, D. (2017). Epistemic Processing When Adolescents Read Online:A Verbal Protocol Analysis of More and Less Successful Online Readers. Reading Research Quarterly.Flanagan, J.C. (1954). The critical incident technique. Psychological Bulletin, 51(4), 327-358.Hofer, B. K., & Bendixen, L. D. (2012). Personal epistemology: Theory, research, and future directions. In K. R.Harris, S. Graham, & T. C. Urdan (Eds.), APA Educational Psychology Handbook (Vol. Theories,constructs, and critical issues, pp. 227-256). Washington, DC: American Psychological Assoc.Hofer, B. K., & Pintrich, P. R. (1997). The development of epistemological theories: Beliefs about knowledgeand knowing and their relation to learning. Review of Educational Research, 67(1), 88-140.Hofer, B. K., & Pintrich, P. R. (Eds.). (2002). Personal epistemology: the psychology of beliefs aboutknowledge and knowing. Mahwah, N.J. ; London Lawrence Erlbaum.Khine, M. S. (Ed.) (2008). Knowing, knowledge and beliefs: Epistemological studies across diverse culturesDordrecht Springer.Lin, F., & Chan, C. K. K. (2018). Promoting elementary students’ epistemology of science through computersupported knowledge-building discourse and epistemic reflection. International Journal of ScienceEducation, doi:10.1080/09500693.2018.1435923Louca, L., Elby, A., Hammer, D., & Kagey, T. (2004). Epistemological resources: Applying a newepistemological framework to science instruction. Educational Psychologist, 39(1), 57-68.Mason, L. (2010). Beliefs about knowledge and revision of knoweldge: On the importantce of epistemic beliefsfor intentional concpetual change in elementary and middle school students. In L. D. Bendixen & F. C.Feucht (Eds.), Personal epistemology in the classroom theory, research, and implications for practice(pp. 258-291). Cambridge, UK ; New York: Cambridge University PressMason, L., Ariasi, N., & Boldrin, A. (2011). Epistemic beliefs in action: Spontaneous reflections aboutknowledge and knowing during online information searching and their influence on learning. Learningand Instruction, 21(1), 137-151.Palincsar, A. S., & Magnusson, S. J. (2001). The interplay of first-hand and second-hand investigations tomodel and support the development of scientific knowledge and reasoning. In S. M. Carver & D. Klahr(Eds.), Cognition and Instruction: Twenty-five Years of Progress (pp. 151-193). Mahwah, NJ:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Perry, W. G. (1970). Forms of intellectual and ethical development in the college years: A scheme. New York:Holt, Rinehart & Winston.Puntambekar, S., & Stylianou, A. (2005). Designing navigation support in hypertext systems based onnavigation patterns. Instructional Science, 33(5-6), 451-481.Qian, G., & Alvermann, D. (1995). Role of epistemological beliefs and learned helplessness in secondaryschool students learning science concepts from text. Journal of Educational Psychology, 87, 282-292.Rummel, N., & Hmelo-Silver, C. (2008). Using contrasting cases to relate collaborative processes andoutcomes in CSCL Paper presented at the International conference for the learning sciences, Utrecht,The Netherlands.Sandoval, W. A. (2012). Situating episetemological development. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 10thinternational conference of the learning sciences, Sydney.Sandoval, W. A., & Reiser, B. J. (2004). Explanation-driven inquiry: Integrating conceptual and epistemicscaffolds for scientific inquiry. Science Education, 88(3), 345-372.Schauble, L., Glaser, R., Duschl, R. A., Schulze, S., & John, J. (1995). Students' understanding of the objectivesand procedures of experimentation in the science classroom. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4(2),131-166.Schommer, M. (1990). Effects of beliefs about the nature of knowledge on comprehension. Journal ofEducational Psychology, 82(3), 498-504.Stathopoulou, C., & Vosniadou, S. (2007). Exploring the relationship between physics-related epistemologicalbeliefs and physics understanding. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 32(3), 255-281.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the students and the teachers who participated in this study. The research reported in this study issupported by a grant from the National Science Foundation to the fifth author (Award Number: 1418044).ICLS 2018 Proceedings247© ISLS