Re-Engaging Youth: Using Discourse Analysis to ExploreIndividual Agency and Community BelongingGavin Tierney, University of Washington Bothell, gtierney@u.washington.eduAbstract: One of the perennial challenges in public education is how to re-engage youth onthe margins of education. One of the strategies for re-engaging youth is guiding them intoalternative schools. Using Thematic Role Analysis, this paper examines the ways andtimeframes that youth identify as agents and members in two alternative school communities.Major issues addressedCurrently in the United States, alternative high schools exist as one of the primary mechanisms in publiceducation for supporting “at-risk” youth (Tierney, 2016). When educational systems, officially and unofficially,define success and failure, marginalization and inequity of participation become part of the process of school(Vadeboncoeur, 2009). In this way, alternative schools often serve youth who, in some way or another, havebeen marginalized, and possibly unsuccessful, in school. The role of alternative schools then becomes to notonly support youths’ academic success, but also helping youth redefine their academic identities and their rolein school (Tierney, 2016). This paper explores the ways youth discuss themselves as participants in educationand within the specific learning communities in two alternative schools.Potential significanceWork on re-engaging youth in education often focuses on either changing the youth or changing the contextsand influences of youths’ lives (te Riele, 2007). In both instances, youth are acted upon without a significantvoice in the process. This paper looks specifically at how youth discuss themselves and uses discourse analysisto explore the ways they do or do not talk of themselves as active agents in their lives and connected membersto their schools. When rethinking learning, the Learning Sciences need to continue to explore new ways tobroaden participation and narrow the margins of public education.Theoretical approachesPrevious research has explored how agency and authenticity can impact youth identity development, providingopportunities for youth to put parts of themselves into their participation in school (Nasir, 2012). Participation ina community of practice simultaneously shapes the identity of the participants and also the community ofpractice itself (Wenger, 1998). Membership can thus be observed through shifting engagement in the practicesand values of a community. Youth discourse was analyzed using thematic role analysis (Finegan, 2011) to lookat the timeframes in which youth developed membership in the communities.Methodological approachesThe data for this paper is from a larger ethnographic study that explored youth identity development throughoutyouths’ first year in two public alternative high schools, Pathways and Redwood (all names in this paper arepseudonyms). This paper reports on findings from a thematic role analysis (Finegan, 2011) that was completedto complement qualitative analysis on youth participation and discourse, reported in Tierney (2016). Pathwaysis a small one-year high school program (approximately 50 students) where youth school are leaders at thedistrict-run wilderness camp, leading visiting groups of sixth graders. Redwood is a larger high school(approximately 350 students), without grades and with a focus on personalized learning and democraticeducation. At both schools, students either self-selected into the schools, seeking a learning alternative, or wereguided into the schools because of credit deficiency, truancy, etc. At both schools, all incoming transfer studentswere recruited for the study and case youth were chosen because of previous experiences with marginalizationin school. Case youth were interviewed throughout the school year (five to seven hours each) and were observedin multiple school classes and contexts (approximately 20 hours each). Initially, data was qualitatively coded toexamine resources and processes of youth identity development (Tierney, 2016). Following that, thematic roleanalysis was used to reexamine interviews and surveys. The analysis focused specifically on the agents used intheir responses (“I”, “we”) and the action (verbs) connected to the agents. Specifically, interviews from twocomparison cases were chosen for analysis – DJ from Pathways High School and Penelope from RedwoodsHigh School. Interviews from the beginning of the year (October), midyear (February), and end of year (May)were used to see shifts in discourse over time. Survey data and interviews from two additional cases were thenICLS 2018 Proceedings1619© ISLSanalyzed. Surveys were completed by all consented youth in September, following orientation, and focused ontheir previous education and reasons for enrolling in the alternative schools.Major findingsAs reported in Tierney (2016), while the two sites shared many similar resources for supporting youth identitydevelopment, they approached the role of the individual and community differently. Teachers and youth atRedwood focused on personalized learning (self-guided learning, personal responsibility for learning) andcommunity participation (school committee participation). While teachers and youth at Pathways focused on theindividual as part of the community (community leadership, team building). Analysis identified differences inhow youth oriented to the school community and the timeframe it took to do so.“I” and “we”: Differences in use and actionThroughout the interviews in the study, youth used the pronouns “I” and “we”. However, how they used thosepronouns differed in relation to whether or not they described themselves as active agents and what goals theiruse of “I” and “we” were connected to. The use of “I” as an agent followed a similar pattern across the twocases, indicating that both youth talked about themselves as active agents at the alternative schools. Throughoutthe year, both students employed a range of verbs in relation to the alternative schools, including opinions,observations, and a number of actions for what they saw themselves as able to do in school.While there were some minor differences across the two cases in how they used “I” as an agent, thebigger difference occurred in the use of “we” as an agent. DJ used “we” to describe actions that the students haddone, but also when describing Pathways (“We're all trying to get to know each other and we always call eachother family”). Penelope, on the other hand, used “we” when describing actions they had done in class, out-ofschool activity (horseback riding), and her experiences at her previous school (“We just wrote whatever theteacher wanted us to”), never when describing Redwood. At the middle and end of the year both DJ andPenelope regularly used “we” as the agent when talking about the alternative schools. However, Penelopetypically used “we” to describe actions she and other students took in and out of classes, while DJ used “we” todescribe actions he and other students took, but also to describe Pathways and more abstract practices done atthe school (“It's because we get to think about how to be a better you”). This use of “we” seemed to show theshared repertoire and alignment with the communities that Penelope developed over the year and that DJ haddeveloped early and then maintained. A second round of analysis focused on surveys interviews from two othercases and produced primarily similar results, with the Pathways students talking about themselves as communitymembers very early in the year.The patterns that case youth used shows how, over the course of the year, the various ways thatdiscourse around agency and community membership shifted. These findings seem to indicate that the learningcontexts of the two schools influenced how youth talked about themselves, specifically how they spoke ofthemselves as a part of the learning community. This contributes to work that examines trajectories ofcommunity membership and belonging (Wenger, 1998), resources for identity development (Nasir, 2012), theutility of discourse analysis to examine engagement and membership (Finegan, 2012), the design andimplementation of alternative schools (Tierney, 2016), and the re-engagement of youth as they reframe schooland their role in it (te Riele, 2007; Vadeboncoeur. 2009). With the goal of supporting the learning and identitydevelopment of diverse, and often marginalized, youth in education, future work would benefit from examiningyouth discourse on identity development and community membership and the specific community and identityresources available for youth in and across learning environments.ReferencesFinegan, E. (2012). Language: Its structure and use (6th ed.). Boston, MA: Wadsworth Cengage Learning.Nasir, N. S. (2012). Racialized identities: Race and achievement among African American youth. Stanford,California: Stanford University Press.te Riele, K. (2007). Educational alternatives for marginalised youth. The Australian Educational Researcher,34(3), 53-68.Tierney, G. (2016). Agency outside the margins: Identity development of youth attending alternative highschools (Doctoral dissertation). University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.Vadeboncoeur, J. (2009). Spaces of Difference: The Contradictions of Alternative Educational Programs.Educational Studies, 45(3), 280-299.Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge, U.K.; New York,N.Y.: Cambridge University Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1620© ISLS