Reasoning About Uncertainty and Efficient Decision-making inEngineering DesignChandan Dasgupta, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay (India), cdasgupta@iitb.ac.inIntroductionEngineering design has been defined as a systematic, iterative and reflective process by which engineersunderstand a problem, generate potential solutions, evaluate them, and refine the ideas for solving users’ needswhile satisfying a given set of constraints (Dym et al., 2005). It uses design thinking, a complex process thatlearners often struggle with (Dym et al., 2005). Core characteristics of design thinking include toleratingambiguity, maintaining a systems perspective, handling uncertainty, effective decision making, working in ateam, and communicating design ideas effectively (Dym et al., 2005). My prior work suggests that when middleschool students are primed with a suboptimal design and are then asked to solve an ill-structured engineeringdesign challenge, they engage in various disciplinary practices and design thinking to take effective designdecisions (Dasgupta, 2015). This research also suggested that uncertainty may have promoted learning about thedisciplinary practices and scaffolds like the suboptimal design may have helped students manage uncertaintywhile they were taking effective design decisions.Uncertainty likely plays an important role in facilitating content learning by creating opportunities forknowledge construction and transition of tacit understanding to normative understanding (Jordan et al., 2012).Further research is needed to develop a good understanding about the mechanism of efficient decision-makingunder uncertainty and the nature of appropriate scaffolds needed in the learning environment to support robustdesign thinking during the process. My current research focuses on this gap and draws on prior research in thefields of Learning Sciences, Engineering Education, Human-Computer Interaction and Neuroscience research.Literature reviewPrior research has demonstrated that there are various interpretations of uncertainty. Uncertainty can occur dueto lack of a well-defined problem, lack of knowledge about the problem, incomplete information, abundance ofconflicting information, inadequate understanding, presence of undifferentiated alternatives which often lead toconflict, and doubt between team-members (Lipshitz, & Strauss, 1997; Radinsky, 2008). At a very broad level,two categories emerge from this prior work – content uncertainty and relational uncertainty. Content uncertaintyarises while solving an engineering design problem where all the criteria are seldom specified completely andone rarely has enough knowledge to solve the problem right away (Ullman, 2001; Jonassen, Strobel & Lee,2006). Relational uncertainty arises out of a cognitive feeling of doubt between team members, discomfortabout the unknown, and lack of a well-defined social position in the team (Jordan & McDaniel Jr, 2014;Radinsky, 2008). Learners employ various strategies to manage such uncertainties – reduce uncertainty,acknowledge uncertainty, suppress uncertainty, maintain uncertainty, and even increase uncertainty (Jordan &McDaniel Jr, 2014; Lipshitz, & Strauss, 1997; Ullman, 2001). Further research is needed to understand themechanism by which learners reason about each type of uncertainty and the scaffolds and feedback processesthat might be helpful in supporting the strategies thereby promoting efficient decision-making and robust designthinking (Dym et al. 2005).Emerging research agendaMy research focuses on the following three strands- (a) designing learning environments for effectively primingand anchoring learners’ design thinking and decision-making process under uncertainty, (b) understanding themechanism by which learners reason about uncertainty and take informed design decisions, and (c) developingfeedback processes (with and without technology) by which teachers can effectively promote productivedecision-making under uncertainty and ensure that learners are engaging in robust design thinking.Learning environments for supporting decision-making under uncertaintyI am working on developing a framework for characterizing various types of uncertainties, investigating howthey are introduced in an engineering design problem-solving environment and how we can sustain them duringthe design activity by embedding various types of scaffolds in the learning environment to maximize thelearning opportunity. I also investigate the role of the teacher when learners are engaged in managing1852uncertainty and how teachers can support the decision-making process effectively. This strand draws fromseminal research on scaffolding complex learning (Reiser, 2004; Quintana et al., 2004).Mechanism of reasoning about uncertainty and taking informed design decisionsThis strand focuses on characterizing various strategies used by learners for managing each type of uncertaintyin an engineering design problem-solving environment. I focus on unpacking the mechanism of how learnersreason about the uncertainty, the learning that happens from such engagement and the role of the activity,context and culture in which the learning occurs; thus, taking a situated learning perspective (Lave & Wenger,1991).Here, I take a multimodal analysis approach using electroencephalography (EEG), electrodermalactivation sensors and eye-tracking in addition to audio-video data for drawing inferences about what and howlearners are learning (Worsley, 2017). This approach enables me to explore the translation of neuroscienceresearch (e.g., Kounios & Beeman, 2009) and investigate the neurological mechanisms underlying designthinking and apply findings about how the brain works to design learning environments and also refine theoriesof learning (Johri, 2011).Feedback processes for promoting effective decision-making under uncertaintyFormative feedback is essential for making sustained progress towards the learning goals in a classroomenvironment. This line of research draws from Shute’s framework for providing formative feedback (Shute,2008) and focuses on identifying appropriate technology and understanding the process for providing effectiveformative feedback to the learners while they are engaged in managing uncertainty.ReferencesDym, C. L., Agogino, A. M., Eris, O., Frey, D. D., & Leifer, L. J. (2005). Engineering design thinking,teaching, and learning. Journal of Engineering Education, 94(1), 103-120.Dasgupta, C. (2015). Call the Plumber: Improvable Models as Priming Artifacts in Student Engineering DesignActivities. (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from https://indigo.uic.edu/handle/10027/19646.Ullman, D. G. (2001). Robust decision-making for engineering design. J. of Engineering Design, 12(1), 3-13.Johri, A., & Olds, B. M. (2011). Situated engineering learning: Bridging engineering education research and thelearning sciences. Journal of Engineering Education, 100(1), 151-185.Jonassen, D., Strobel, J., & Lee, C. B. (2006). Everyday problem solving in engineering: Lessons forengineering educators. Journal of Engineering Education, 95(2), 139-151.Jordan, M. E., Schallert, D. L., Park, Y., Lee, S. A., Chiang, Y. V., Cheng, A. C., . . . Kim, T. (2012).Expressing uncertainty in computer-mediated discourse: Language as a marker of intellectual work.Discourse Processes, 49, 660–692.Jordan, M. E., & McDaniel Jr, R. R. (2014). Managing uncertainty during collaborative problem solving inelementary school teams: The role of peer influence in robotics engineering activity. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 23(4), 490-536.Kounios, J., & Beeman, M. (2009). The Aha! moment: The cognitive neuroscience of insight. Currentdirections in psychological science, 18(4), 210-216.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge Univ. Press.Lipshitz, R., & Strauss, O. (1997). Coping with Uncertainty: A Naturalistic Decision-Making Analysis.OrganizationalBehaviorandHumanDecisionProcesses,69(2),149-163.doi:10.1006/obhd.1997.2679Quintana, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R. G., ... & Soloway, E. (2004). Ascaffolding design framework for software to support science inquiry. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 13(3), 337-386.Radinsky, J. (2008). Students’ roles in group-work with visual data: A site of science learning. Cognition andInstruction, 26, 145–194.Reiser, B. J. (2004). Scaffolding complex learning: The mechanisms of structuring and problematizing studentwork. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 273-304.Shute, V. J. (2008). Focus on formative feedback. Review of Educational Research, 78(1), 153-189.Worsley, M. (2017). Multimodal analysis. In J. Roschelle, W. Martin, J. Ahn, & P. Schank (Eds.),Cyberlearning Community Report: The State of Cyberlearning and the Future of Learning WithTechnology (pp. 46-50). Menlo Park CA: SRI International.1853