Criss Crossing Science Domains in Knowledge BuildingCommunities: An Exploratory StudyAhmad Khanlari, Gaoxia Zhu, Stacy Costa, and Marlene Scardamaliaa.khanlari@mail.utoronto.ca, gaoxia.Zhu@mail.utoronto.ca, stacy.costa@mail.utoronto.ca,marlene.scardamalia@utoronto.caUniversity of TorontoAbstract: The complex nature of 21st century knowledge work is forcing a shift from singlesubject curriculum units to interdisciplinary perspectives. Knowledge Building pedagogy andtechnology aim to turn high levels of socio-cognitive control over to students to enable them toassume responsibility for functions typically assumed by the teacher. This exploratory studyaims to assess the extent to which elementary-school students within Knowledge Buildingcommunities are able to criss cross science domains and, in doing so, contribute to theimprovement of the community knowledge.IntroductionRecent reforms highlighted a need for crosscutting concepts- linking across the domains- to “provide studentswith connections and intellectual tools that are related across the differing areas of disciplinary content and canenrich their application of practices and their understanding of core ideas” (NRC, 2012, p. 233). To have asuccessful crosscutting classroom, it is perceived that the teacher should carefully design the course plans andactivities to make a connection between different concepts (Savage, 2010). The purpose of this exploratory studyis to explore if students in a Knowledge Building classroom, which turns high-level agency over to students, takeover levels of agency for connecting different science domains in the course of exploring core concept, andwhether such connections help them improve their understanding of the core concept.Methodology and data analysisThe dataset used for this study is comprised of 370 notes posted on Knowledge Forum by Grade 1 students,exploring “water” and “water cycle”. We employed a lexical analysis tool, called Text Analyzer, to analyzestudents online discourse in order to extract all the words used by students. We went through the word lists andselected scientific words--the words related to a scientific concept and categorized them into two categories: coretopics (within curriculum) and crossing domain. Within curriculum words are the words that, according to thecurriculum expectations, students were supposed to discuss and learn when learning the core topic, while crossingdomain words are the scientific words which students were not required to learn when learning the core concept.Then, we extracted all the notes that included those crossing domain words, and applied Ways of Contributing(WoC) coding scheme (Chuy et al., 2011) to analyze the notes and explore how these cross domain notescontributed to the community knowledge.ResultsFigure 1 shows the scientific words that students used in their online discourses. The “within curriculum” wordswere displayed in the inner circle while the “crossing domain” words were displayed in the outer circle. As Figure1 shows, students did not limit their discussions to concepts directly relatedto water (e.g. water, raindrop, evaporation), but they tried to make connectionbetween the main concept and other topics such as space (e.g. moon, Mars,Jupiter, meteor, gravity), and biology and biodiversity (e.g. body, growth,digest, animals, butterfly, breath). After finding the cross-domain keywords,we looked at the notes containing cross domain words and identified 98 notescontained cross domain key words. Two raters coded and categorized all thenotes using the Ways of Contributing scheme (notes may fall under more thanone category) and achieved an agreement rate of 99.27%. According to theanalysis, 45.5% of the cross-domain notes were categorized as “theorizing”notes, 26.8% as “thought-provoking questions”, 10.7% as obtaininginformation and working with information, 8.9% as synthesizing andcomparing notes, and 8% as supporting discussion notes.Figure 1. Students scientific wordsICLS 2018 Proceedings1719© ISLSDiscussion and conclusionAs it is evident from the results, the main type of students’ contributions is theorizing. Knowledge Building aimsto provide opportunities for students to engage in theory building by taking collective responsibility for pursuingdeeper understanding and explanations of the world (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006). Results suggest that conceptsfrom extended fields of science are used in theorizing notes, seemingly a reflection of students’ effort to extendand deepen their understanding of the world around them. The second most common contribution of students wasthought provoking questions (26.8%). Several studies have shown that questions push dialogue forward and makethe discourse more sustainable and productive, which can help increase explanatory coherence (e.g. Khanlari,Resendes, Zhu, & Scardamalia, 2017). While criss crossing knowledge domains students expressed puzzlementsand possibilities, discourse moves that help to foster sustainable and productive discourse. Overall, the resultsshow that students as early as Grade 1 exercise epistemic agency in extending and reconstructing knowledgeboundaries, going beyond the traditional classroom expectations through crossing science borders. Results showthat crossing science domain not only extends the range of science concepts they consider but also helps improvecommunity knowledge--one reason why Knowledge Building has the potential to “set a knowledge buildingclassroom off as profoundly different from even the best of traditional and modern classrooms” (Scardamalia,2002, p. 77). For the future directions, we aim to replicate the study with a rich data set, and explore if this crisscrossing knowledge domains happens in other grades as well or not..ReferencesChuy, M., Resendes, M., Tarchi, C., Chen, B., Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2011). Ways of contributing toan explanation-seeking dialogue in science and history. QWERTY - Interdisciplinary Journal ofTechnology, Culture and Education, 6(2), 242–260.Khanlari, A., Resendes, Zhu, G., & Scardamalia, M. (2017). Productive Knowledge Building Discourse ThroughStudent-Generated Questions. In the proceedings of the 12th International Conference on ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 2017 (pp. 585-588).NRC (National Research Council). (2012). A framework for K–12 science education: Practices, crosscuttingconcepts, and core ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Savage, J. (2010). Cross Curricular Teaching and Learning in the Secondary School. London, Routledge.Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.),Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago, IL: Open Court.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In K. Sawyer(Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97–118). New York: Cambridge UniversityPress.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1720© ISLS