Social and Cognitive Group Awareness to Aid ArgumentationAbout Socially Acute Questions on Social MediaMarielle Dado, University of Duisburg-Essen, marielle.dado@uni-due.deDaniel Bodemer, University of Duisburg-Essen, bodemer@uni-due.deAbstract: Debates about socially acute questions (e.g., migration) may help developargumentation skills. However, students may be hesitant to present different views to maintaininterpersonal relationships, hindering communication and integration of multiple perspectives.Social networking sites (SNS) have been used to extend classroom discussions to such realworld topics. However, their flat-structured layout may not suit argumentation activities. Thisquasi-experiment in an applied classroom setting investigates the effects of a group awarenesstool (GAT) that combines social (group members’ names) and cognitive (discussion points/stance in initial arguments) information in a network graph to aid communication behaviorand integration of multiple perspectives during argumentation on a flat-structured SNS.Students supported by the GAT engaged in discussions with non-friends and students outsidetheir class more than the control group, though the latter integrated multiple perspectivesmore. The GAT appears to have increased familiarity among non-friends. The potentialinfluence of interpersonal relationships on integration of multiple perspectives is discussed.IntroductionInterpersonal relationships have been found to influence learning outcomes, especially when it comes todiscussions about socially acute questions (SAQs): social dilemmas that are often controversial and that haveimplications on several fields of knowledge (Simonneaux, 2007). Students tend to be exposed to mediarepresentations of SAQs that are socio-sociological (e.g., immigration, globalization) or socio-scientific (e.g.,global warming, cloning) in nature, which means that students may already have personal opinions about theseissues (Zeidler & Nichols, 2009). Thus, introducing SAQs in the classroom provides an opportunity fordiffering views to emerge, and therefore for argumentation skills to develop. However, given the controversythat often surrounds SAQs, students may be hesitant to express disagreement in the interest of maintainingharmonious interpersonal relationships (Kuhn, Wang, & Li, 2010). This is a challenge because demonstratingand acknowledging awareness of opinions and perspectives other than one’s own is a marker of goodargumentation quality (Sadler & Donnelly, 2006). In order to develop argumentation skills, students should beexposed to multiple perspectives through social interaction and discourse in order for them to evaluate claims,analyze evidence, and make informed judgements about these issues (Simonneaux, 2007; Leitão, 2000).Recently there has been growing interest in the use of social networking sites (SNS) such as Facebookand Google Community to support discussion and mutual learning between students (Manca & Ranieri, 2013).One big motivation for teachers to adopt SNS in their classroom is to have a platform to discuss real-worldissues related to the current lesson (Chen & Bryer, 2012). This suggests that social media may be an appropriateplatform to discuss SAQs. However, since many SNS platforms were built for commercial rather than learningpurposes, they may lack structural features that promote meaningful discussions between learners. Kirschner(2015) particularly criticized the “flat structure” arrangement of discussions on SNS: that is, unlike hierarchicaland threaded discussions, posts on a typical SNS appear all in one page in reverse chronological order, withreplies to each post appearing un-nested below each post. This makes it difficult to find one’s own postings, letalone those of others (Kirschner, 2015). In an argumentation activity, this could make it difficult for learners tobecome aware of others’ discussion points and to connect their claims to the arguments of their peers. Toovercome this limitation, group awareness tools (GATs) could be designed to provide information throughvisualizations about members of a learning group to implicitly aid individual learners to behave, communicate,and reflect in ways that are productive for collaboration and learning (Janssen & Bodemer, 2013). Thisinformation can be broadly categorized as (1) social/behavioral awareness, such as who are the group members,who they are communicating with, or how they are contributing to the task; or (2) cognitive/knowledgeawareness, such as the level of prior knowledge of group members, the information that they possess oropinions that they hold. When GATs are designed to allow for comparison of one’s knowledge or behavior tothat of their peers’, learners may adapt their actions accordingly. For example, GATs that highlight knowledgedifferences led learners to communicate with their peers to fill their knowledge gaps (Erkens, Schlottbom, &Bodemer, 2016) or to discuss perceived conflicts with peers in a more interactive way (Bodemer, 2011).ICLS 2018 Proceedings456© ISLSStudies about GA support specifically for social and attitudinal characteristics of group members duringargumentation in SNS have yielded some promising results. In a series of controlled lab experiments, Tsovaltziand colleagues supported group awareness on a Facebook-like platform by informing participants, as they werepreparing their individual arguments prior to collaborative discussion, that their arguments may be publishedafter completion of the experiment for other students to comment and amend. In one study (Tsovaltzi, Puhl,Judele, & Weinberger, 2014), they found beneficial interaction effects on individual argument elaboration whencombined with argumentation scripts, but a detrimental main effect on learning. In another study, theyadditionally found that group awareness did not lead to considering multiple perspectives (Tsovaltzi, Judele,Puhl, & Weinberger, 2015). The researchers hypothesize that group awareness in this case led to overcautiousness whilst constructing their initial arguments, which led to more individualistic behavior. Puhl, Tsovaltzi &Weinberger (2015) found that displaying in a 2-dimensional space the communication attitudes of the groupmembers’ relative to one’s own attitudes led to gains in domain knowledge and a change of attitude towardsmulti-perspective communication.Previous work suggests that the interpersonal relationships between students may have an influence ontheir awareness of multiple perspectives, which is essential for successful argumentation. Although previousGAT research in argumentation in SNS have demonstrated some promising effects, none so far have addressedovercoming the “flat-structuredness” of SNS by bringing awareness to the diversity of arguments in thecommunity and enabling comparison of one's opinions to the opinions of others. The present study investigatesthe effects of a GAT that attempts to address these concerns: by combining social information (names of groupmembers) and cognitive information (discussion points and stance of each group member) in a network graph toaid argumentation on a flat-structured SNS. Particularly, the influence of GA support on communicationbehaviour, learning outcomes, shifts in opinions, awareness and integration of multiple perspectives areevaluated in a SNS in applied classroom setting, which is different from most GA studies on argumentation inSNS which are usually conducted in laboratory settings (Tsovaltzi et al, 2015; Bodemer, 2011). In addition, thestudy also describes how users interact with a GAT arranged in a network graph and what these interactionsimply about how the information contained in it is processed productively.MethodDesign and participantsA quasi-experiment was conducted with twenty-nine Year 12 students (mean age=17.2, SD=.45) in twoEconomics classes with the same teacher in an International Baccalaureate (IB) school in Germany. Because theexperiment sessions were embedded as classroom activities, the research design was selected in the interest ofecological validity and in order not disrupt the remaining class time. One class (n=14) was randomly assigned asthe control group and the other (n=15) was assigned as the GAT (i.e., experimental) group. Their finalEconomics grades in Year 11 (7 is the highest possible grade) shows that prior academic performance betweenthe control (M=6.2, SD= 1.17) and GAT (M=5.86, SD=1.1) groups is similar. In terms of English languageability, most of the students are placed in English A class (native/native-like speakers), except for 1 student inthe control group and 3 students in the GAT group. However, the teacher believes that both classes arecompetent in academic English, and the English B students perform well in their economics classes. Six Year 12students (all 17 years old) from an IB school in Australia also took part in the experiment as a classroom activityand interacted with participants; however, due to technical difficulties their data was excluded from the analysis.Social media learning environment, learning activity and instructionsThe social media platform used for the study is called Google+, an SNS created by Google, which allows usersto create “Communities” in which users can engage in asynchronous discussions about specific topics. Theformat can be described as flat-structured (e.g., posts appear chronologically and replies to posts were notnested). This platform was selected by the IB Economics teacher as it could be easily integrated into thestudents’ existing web tools, since all student email addresses were hosted by Google’s email service Gmail,which is required to access Google+. The teacher created a private Google Community for his 2 Economicsclasses, as well as the economics class of a former colleague in Australia, to provide a platform for debatesabout real-world issues related to economics. Apart from a brief session in which each student had to post ashort self-introduction, participants had no prior experience with Google+ before the experiment sessions.Four experiment sessions were integrated as class activities in 4 separate 50-minute Economics classperiods over the course of 4 weeks (1 session per week). Both groups completed Sessions 1, 3 and 4 on the samedays. Due to some technical problems, Session 2 for the GAT group was postponed to the day after the controlgroup completed Session 2. No class was allowed to proceed to the next session until all students haveICLS 2018 Proceedings457© ISLSparticipated in the current one. Students worked on the experiment sessions on their own computers and werenot allowed to engage in off-task behavior or speak to their classmates. They were also not allowed to interacton Google Community outside experiment sessions.The first 3 experiment sessions corresponded to the knowledge building cycle proposed by Leitão (2000)whereby students first (1) construct an initial argument (Session 1); (2) have the opportunity to construct aresponse/counterargument (Session 2); and (3) construct a reply to responses they received and revise initialargument (Session 3). “Migration” was selected as the topic for discussion for its relevance to the DevelopmentEconomics unit of the IB Economics syllabus and informal observations that suggested a diversity ofperspectives among the students. In Session 1, each student was asked to create a post on Google Communitywith a 4-6 sentence argument to the question: “To what extent do you agree with the statement: ‘Migration fromdeveloping to developed countries leads to economic development.’?” Each post had to (1) mention at least 1economic stakeholder and whether it benefits from migration; and (2) had to be supported by at least 1 articlefrom a credible online resource (students were provided with links to appropriate sources). In Session 2, bothcontrol and GAT groups were given the same instructions to follow when commenting, namely (1) comment onat least 1 post; (2) structure comments around their initial arguments in Session 1; (3) if they hold the sameperspective, write down exactly what they agree on and why; (4) if they hold a different perspective, write downexactly what they disagree on and why; (5) ask questions if something is not clear or if they would like moreinformation; (6) give feedback or suggestions and explain why they think this could be helpful. Students werealso explicitly instructed to read as many posts as they can before commenting, as well as how to use the“Search” function to find posts by specific people, so that they do not simply comment on the first post they see.In Session 3, students were instructed to (1) add to or edit their Session 1 argument if their perspective haschanged, or to write new 4-6 sentence response to the initial question; or (2) write about why their perspectivehas stayed the same. In Session 4, students answered a survey about their experience during the experiment.Group awareness toolThe GAT provided to the GAT group visualizes howeach student’s initial argument (Session 1) is positionedwith respect to the opinion/responses of their peers (seeFigure 1). The tool is a network graph composed of 2types of nodes: (1) students (circles); and (2) migrationstakeholders (rectangles). An edge is drawn betweenthese 2 node types if the student mentions thatstakeholder in their initial argument, with the color(green or red) indicating the stance of the student(whether it benefits or does not benefit from migration,respectively). Two coders jointly identified 11stakeholders from the initial arguments andindependently coded the stances (Cohens’ k=0.86). Thenetwork graph was then created using the R packagevisNet that produced an interactive graphic that allowedFigure 1: Group awareness tool.users to click and rearrange the graph elements. Thefollowing clickstream data was logged by the tool: drag view (i.e.,zooming, panning and scaling the view of the graph), click node, drag node, click edge, drag edge. The toolitself is hosted on a separate URL and was not integrated on Google Community. Therefore, students had tokeep two browser windows open during the experiment sessions (one for the tool, one for Google Community).The tool was intended for students in the GAT group to help them select which student (posts) to reply to inSession 2, based on their initial arguments on the discussion topic in Session 1. Somewhat similar to the GAT ofPuhl et al (2015) on a 2D space, the networked arrangement of students and stakeholders (i.e., discussion points)allows not only a general overview of the initial arguments in the entire community, but also enables individualsto compare their arguments to those of others based on their connections (or lack thereof) to the samestakeholders. Based on previous GAT research that also enabled users to compare their information to others(e.g., Erkens et al, 2016), this arrangement along with the color-coded edges should help students to easilyidentify differences between stances on the same stakeholders and use it as a point of discussion. Thus, in orderto overcome the flat-structured layout of Google Community, the GAT was designed to influencecommunication behavior on the basis of social (names of group members) and cognitive information (discussionpoints and stance of each group member), specifically with regards to differences in opinion.ICLS 2018 Proceedings458© ISLSProcedureIn Session 1, students were first given 5 minutes to answer a survey that asked for their opinion on specificmigration stakeholders (see “Measures…” section). Then they were asked to create individual posts on GoogleCommunity with their initial arguments regarding the topic of migration, as stated in the “Social media learningenvironment…” section. Students were also encouraged, but not required, to use the sentence starter “I agree/donot agree with the statement…”. Students were given 15 minutes to post their initial arguments. In Session 2, thecontrol group proceeded to read and comment on their peers’ posts on Google Community for 15 minutes,whereas the GAT group was first introduced to the GAT in two phases. First, students were trained on how tointerpret the GAT using a small-scale version with dummy data and were prompted to identify student pairs thathad the same/different opinion on the same stakeholder. Second, they viewed the GAT and were instructed tofind their name and compare their Session 1 arguments with the arguments of their peers. They were explicitlytold that the GAT is interactive, and that they could click and drag the graph elements. Students were then askedin a survey to identify at least 1 student that shared/did not share their opinion on the same stakeholder. Theywere given 5 minutes for the training phase and 10 minutes to explore the GAT, before being given a further 15minutes to comment on at least 1 of their peers’ posts on Google Community, just like the control group (thetool was made available to them during this time). In Session 3, students were instructed to read their Session 1arguments and reflect on whether their perspective has changed since reading, commenting and receivingcomments on their posts. Then, in the form of a comment on their Session 1 post, they were instructed to revisetheir initial opinions and respond to the comments they received. They were given 15 minutes to completeSession 3. Session 4 was a post-study questionnaire that asked students about their experiences in the GoogleCommunity activity (see “Measures…” section).Measures, research question, and hypothesesCommunication behavior is defined as how students chose to reply to certain posts over others on GoogleCommunity in Session 2. The initial opinions of each student as expressed in Session 1 (i.e., stakeholdersmentioned and stance) were compared the initial opinion of the student that they replied to in Session 2, andcategorized as having: (1) the same opinion on at least 1 stakeholder; (2) a different opinion on at least 1stakeholder; or (3) having no shared opinion on a stakeholder. Students were also asked to indicate who amongthe students in the Google Community they would consider as their friends to check whether friendships hadany influence on their communication behavior. Integration of multiple perspectives was based on Leitão’s(2000) description of the impact of others’ perspectives from the discussion on one’s initial argument: multipleperspectives can be dismissed, localized (alternative perspectives are acknowledged but the initial argument isretained), integrated with initial opinions (e.g., allowing for some exceptions or conditions), or fully accepted.The final arguments were coded accordingly by two coders (kappa=.76).To measure learning outcomes, the teacher administered two practice exams for IB Economics (as isstandard practice in the school) before Session 1 and after Session 4. These covered topics from theDevelopment Economics unit of the IB Economics syllabus. One question (worth 8 points) required students toapply their economics knowledge to evaluate a reference news article (pre-test: the impact of the involvement ofChina in Ethiopia’s economy; post-test: strategies that the Haitian government can use to improve theireconomy). As stated in the grading rubric, to successfully answer the essay question “students must offer aconsidered and balanced review that includes a range of arguments, factors or hypotheses. Opinions orconclusions should be presented clearly and supported by appropriate evidence”. Therefore, students wererequired to apply the same argumentation skills in both the exam question and the experiment sessions.Another measure administered before and after the experiment was opinions on migration stakeholders.In Session 1 (before posting initial arguments) and Session 4, students rated 8 economic stakeholders ofmigration in both the host (developed) country and country of origin (developing) according to whethermigration negatively or positively benefits them (1 – very negative impact to 5 – very positive impact).Awareness of the multiple perspectives was evaluated in Session 4 by asking students, for each of the 11stakeholders appearing on the GAT, whether they perceived the overall opinion in the community of the impactof that stakeholder on migration as mostly positive, negative, or rather well-distributed between the two stances.One point was given for each correct answer for a total of 11 points. In addition to the dependent variables andthe clickstream data logged by the GAT, self-reports on the experiences of the GAT group with the GAT werecollected in Session 4. Students were asked to rate (1 – strongly disagree to 5 – strongly agree) 4 statementspertaining to the usefulness of the GAT in (1) representing their initial argument; (2) providing them with anoverview of the Community’s opinion on migration stakeholders (3) helping students identify which of theirpeers agreed/disagreed with their opinions; and helping students decide which posts to (3) read and (4) commenton in Session 2. Participants were also asked to assess their own change in perspective: whether theirICLS 2018 Proceedings459© ISLSperspectives (1) completely changed, (2) did not change at all, (3) changed by integrating new perspectives withoriginal ones, or (4) did not change, but they were able to acknowledge alternative perspective (i.e., localized,Leitão, 2000). They were also asked to specify the most influential source of their change in perspective.Finally, several control variables were also analyzed to investigate how they may impact the findings onthe dependent variables. First, argumentation quality of initial arguments in Session 1 were assessed based onwhether a credible source was cited, as well as on Sadler & Donnelly’s (2007) rubric on “position and rationale”for argumentation, specifically whether or not the claims were grounded (“offers a coherent, logically consistentargument that includes an explanation and rationale for his/her position”, p. 1474). Second, argumentationmoves in Session 2 responses were categorized as either as an (1) agreement; (2) disagreement (including localagreement) or (3) non-argumentative move (e.g., questions, off-topic comments). Finally, for each student, theirinitial argument in Session 1 and their reply to in Session 2 were compared to check whether students used theirinitial arguments as a basis for their peer discussions: (1) complete consistency; (2) partial consistency; and (3)not consistent at all. These variables were coded by two coders; Cohen’s kappa is .88 for argumentation quality,.87 for argumentation moves and .94 consistency of comments to initial arguments.The overall research question for the present study is: Can a GAT depicting (1) students (socialinformation) (2) discussion topics and (3) opinion stances (cognitive information) foster argumentation andlearning on a social media platform? It is hypothesized that students supported by the GAT will post argumentson posts that reflect a different opinion than their initial arguments (communication behavior) (H1); be morelikely to demonstrate integration (H2) of multiple perspectives; will receive higher scores on learning outcomes(H3); (2) and exhibit a greater shift in opinions on migration stakeholders (H4), and demonstrate betterawareness (H5) of multiple perspectives.ResultsTable 1: Sample size per experiment session and final sample size associated with each variableClass sizeSession 1Session 2Session 3 andSession 4Control141313GAT151413Total292726121325Variables analyzed with this sample sizeNoneArgument qualityCommunication behavior; argumentation moves; consistency ofcomments to initial argumentNumber of friends; learning outcomes, opinion shifts; (1)awareness and (2) integration of multiple perspectives; selfreported perspective changeSome students were unable to complete all experiment sessions due to absences. Thus, Table 1 summarizes thefinal sample sizes for each of the measured variables. The 6 Australian students participated in Sessions 1-4.However, in Session 2 they mostly interacted with their fellow classmates, except for 2 students who replied to1 student in each group. Therefore, their influence on the data is expected to be minimal.Descriptive information on Session 1 (initial arguments) and Session 2 (comments)A total of 33 initial arguments were posted on Google Community in Session 1 (27 from the experimentalgroups and 6 students in Australia). The quality of arguments was quite high among most students: both groupswere able to make well-grounded claims in their initial arguments (p=1.00, Fisher Exact Test). On average,students in the control group mentioned 2.7(SD=.99) out of 11 stakeholders, of which they took a “benefits frommigration” stance for 1.7 (SD= 1.49) stakeholders and a “does not benefit” stance for 1(SD= .88) stakeholder.The GAT group mentioned 2.23 (SD=1.59) stakeholders, of which they took a “benefits from migration” stancefor 1.69 (SD= 1.37) stakeholders and a “does not benefit” stance for .54 (SD= .78) stakeholder. The meandifference of the two groups on their “does not benefit from migration” stance on stakeholders was significant(Mann Whitney U=48.5, p=.029, r=-.419), indicating that the control group was more likely to express thisstance in their initial arguments than the GAT group. In Session 2, control group received on average1.08(SD=1.24) comments and the GAT group received 1.15(SD=.9) comments. However, not all students wereable to receive comments on their posts: 5 from the control group and 3 from the GAT group. In terms ofargumentation moves, the proportion of students that wrote counterarguments in their comments was 0.62 in thecontrol group and 0.38 in the GAT group, although this difference was not significant (p=.546, Fisher ExactICLS 2018 Proceedings460© ISLSTest). Both groups were also equally likely to use their initial arguments as the basis for the comments(χ2(1)=.653, p=.419).Dependent variablesIn terms of the learning outcomes, mean pre and post-test scores for the control group are 4 (SD=1.1) and 3.83(SD=1.6); for the GAT groups, mean pre and post-test scores are 3.31 (SD=1.3) and 4 (SD=1.6), respectively.However, a mixed ANOVA yielded no significant interaction effect between time and the presence/absence ofthe GAT (F(1, 23)=1.626, p=.206). Analysis of communication behavior in Session 2 also did not yield anysignificant group differences (p=0.667, Fischer’s Exact Test). Both groups were equally likely to comment onpeers’ posts that expressed the same opinion as theirs (and had no differing opinions) on the same stakeholder(control=6, GAT=8). However, students in the control group were 12.6 times more likely to comment onfriends’ posts than students in the GAT group (95% C.I.: 1.19, 678.9, p=0.03, Fisher Exact Test). Furthermore,the odds that students would comment on posts written by their classmates were also 5.33 higher if theybelonged to the control group (χ2(1)=4.06, p=.044). This finding is interesting considering that both groupstended to have friends from within and outside their classroom. The average numbers of friends in the sameclass were 3.5(SD=1.9) for the control group and 4.46(SD=2.9) for the GAT group, though this difference wasnot significant (Mann Whitney U=69.5, p=.63). In terms of friends in the other Economics class, the averagenumbers are 2.25 (SD= 1.86) and 3.85(SD= 2.82) for the control and GAT groups, respectively, although thedifference is non-significant as well (Mann Whitney U=48.5, p=.104). A factorial ANOVA with aligned rankstransformation yielded no significant interaction effect between time (pre-test/post-test) and thepresence/absence of the GAT in terms of shifts of opinions regarding the 16 rated stakeholders (p>0.05). Interms of awareness of multiple perspectives, the mean score for the GAT group was 5.8 (SD=1.1) and thecontrol group mean score was 5.2 (SD=1.6), although the difference is non-significant (Mann Whitney U=53.5,p=.171). Finally, for integration of multiple perspectives, the final arguments of the students fell into only 2 outof the 4 categories in Leitão (2000): integration and dismissal. A chi-square test of independence revealed thatthe odds of students integrating multiple perspectives from the discussion in their final answers was 6.67 higherif they were not supported by the GAT than if they were (χ2(1)=4.98, p=.026). However, according to selfreported change in perspective, only 2 students in each group reported that their perspective “did not change atall”. The self-reports also indicate that of the 21 students who reporting integrating new perspectives, 10 of them(control=4; GAT=6) that reading other students’ posts was the most influential in their change of opinions in thefinal answer; followed by comments received on their posts (mentioned by 3 students in each group).How the GAT group made use of and perceived the group awareness toolIn Session 2, the GAT group spent an average of 3.72 minutes (SD=1.9) exploring the GAT. There were 240recorded interactions, most of which (84.6%) were of students zooming into, panning and scaling the view ofthe graph. This means that it is not possible to determine from the log data which elements of the graph studentswere paying attention to, or whether they noticed similarities and differences between student opinions.However, in the training phase in Session 2, all 14 students were able to correctly identify student pairs from thedummy data that had the same/different opinion on the same stakeholder. All 14 students were likewise able tocorrectly identify from the GAT at least 1 student each that shared/did not share their opinion on the samestakeholder, although only 5 students actually posted on the posts by the students they identified. In Session 4,the GAT group gave neutral to positive ratings on the usefulness of the tool. Students gave positive ratings tothe statements “I was able to see which members agreed or disagreed with my perspective” (M=4.38, SD=.77)and “The graphic helped me gain a general overview of the perspectives of other members in GoogleCommunity” (M=4.3, SD=.85). However, they gave neutral ratings when asked how well they believe the toolrepresented their perspective (M=3.62, SD=.76) and whether the tool helped them decide which posts to read(M=3, SD=1.2) and comment on (M=3.30, SD=1.38) in Session 2. When prompted to explain their ratings, 7students mentioned that seeing who shared or did not share their opinions on the same stakeholder helped themdecide which posts to comment on. One student noted that the graph helped her find posts that talked aboutstakeholders that she did not mention in her initial argument. The remaining 5 students mention that they did nottake the tool in consideration when deciding on posts to comment on, stating that it was confusing, provideslittle information and that it was difficult to remember which students agreed or disagreed with them.DiscussionThe present study investigated a GAT for argumentation about a socially acute question on a flat-structuredSNS, which is often criticized as not being conducive for argumentation activities. Like previous GAT designsfor argumentation in SNS, it attempted to provide both an overview of group information and encourageICLS 2018 Proceedings461© ISLScomparison of one’s information to others. In this study, however, the GAT combines two kinds of GAinformation (social and cognitive) and was designed to guide a specific phase in the activity, whereby studentsmust select peer group members to discuss their opinions on migration with. This was an importantconsideration given that prior to the experiment, the participants already had relationships with each other, aswell as opinions about migration, which could influence how they behave during argumentation activities.In terms of communication behavior, no significant differences were found on the dependent variablemeasured (H1): both groups mainly conversed with students that expressed the same initial arguments as theirson at least one stakeholder. It should be noted that both groups were equally likely to express approving anddissenting opinions during discussion. This could imply that discussions among students probably went beyondthe topics (stakeholders) that they had in common. Based on the log files, interactivity with the details (e.g.,nodes and edges) of the GAT was quite low, even though students were explicitly told that they could interactwith the graph. Thus, it is likely that the GAT group did not deeply process the commonalities and differencesbetween them and their peers. However, subjective ratings indicate that students supported by the GAT mayhave noticed the differences in perspectives in the group. Furthermore, students were able to correctly interpretnetwork graphs with dummy and real data; thus, the networked visualization itself was not too complex tocomprehend. However, from a technical perspective, clicking a name or stakeholder (nodes) as well as theirstance (edges) did not automatically redirect users to the corresponding posts on Google Community, whichcould have discouraged the GAT group from interacting in Session 2 in accordance to the GAT. Nevertheless,despite having friends in both classes, students in the control group overwhelmingly decided to respond to theirfriends in the same class, whereas students in the GAT group were equally likely to comment on friends’ andnon-friends’ posts. The control group’s behaviour is consistent with studies showing that people tend to be morewilling to express their opinions online to friends (Luarn & Hsieh, 2014). Studies have shown that unfamiliaritywith community members demotivates active participation in online discussions (Preece, Nonnecke, &Andrews, 2004) and that familiarity increases the likelihood of participation in online discussion forums (Hew,Cheung, & Ng, 2010). Given that the most dominant action captured by the GAT is zooming, panning, andscaling implies that the GAT group paid more attention to the GAT as a whole, without dwelling too long onany finer node-edge relations. It is possible, then, that they were able to get an overview of who is in thecommunity and which stakeholders they had an opinion about. Hence, the GAT may have created a sense offamiliarity among the students and help them consider the posts of peers that they are not personally close to.Another finding of the study is that the control group was more likely to integrate multiple perspectivesfrom the discussion than the GAT group (H2). Since not all students in the control group received comments onSession 2, the integration of multiple perspectives could not have only been the result of receiving commentscontaining a different perspective; as suggested by the self-reports, reading posts with dissenting opinions mayhave also had an influence. However, the study was not able to track which posts were read by whom andwhether the GAT influenced this behavior. Nevertheless, other studies have suggested that opinion change isinfluenced by the relationship of a person with their communication partners. People are more inclined tochange their opinion when exposed to the opinions of people who are closely related to them; specifically, anydissimilarity in initial opinions is reduced by social influence (Friedkin & Johnsen, 1997). Even when friendstend to have the same initial opinions, friends are still more likely to express disagreement anyway, which couldfoster learning from opposing perspectives (Morey & Hutchens, 2012). This could explain why the controlgroup, who mainly commented on each other’s posts, were more open to changing their initial opinions afterbeing exposed to the opinions of friends. When people are not closely related, as in the case of the GAT groupstudents, then the social influence process does necessarily influence any changes in initial opinions (Friedkin &Johnsen, 1997). Another explanation could be that there were more diverse opinions on migration among thecontrol group’s initial arguments, as they were found to be more likely to take a “does not benefit” stance thanthe GAT group. Thus, the control group could simply have been more open-minded and receptive to differentviews after discussion (Barabas, 2004). Furthermore, self-reports show that only 4 students (2 in each group)indicated that their perspective did not change at all. It is perhaps possible that more students in both groupswere able to integrate or localize new perspectives from the discussion, but did not express this when theyrevised their opinions in Session 3.Overall, the study demonstrates that combining social and cognitive information in a GAT with anetwork visualization may influence communication behavior, but not necessarily in accordance to awareness ofdifferences in initial arguments. Rather, the GAT helped students find posts in a flat-structured SNS that werewritten by students with whom they do not have a close personal relationship, potentially increasing familiarityamong students in the community. Building familiarity could be an important consideration for argumentationin SNS to encourage students to freely discuss controversial SAQs in a supportive environment. The resultsfurther suggest that communicating with friends and exposure to the opinions with whom one has a closeICLS 2018 Proceedings462© ISLSpersonal relationship may influence the likelihood of adopting new perspectives, although alternativeexplanations cannot be ruled out (i.e., that the control group could have been more open-minded). Thus, theseemingly contradictory results (i.e., familiarity may increase overall engagement among non-friends, butcommunication among friends may lead to more multiple perspective taking) could be further investigated inrelation to other variables (e.g., open-mindedness). As these issues will continue to be relevant inside andoutside the classroom, it would be beneficial to understand how to best encourage students to discuss sociallyacute issues in a meaningful way.ReferencesBarabas, J. (2004). How deliberation affects policy opinions. American Political Science Review, 98(4), 687–701. doi:10.1017/S0003055404041425Bodemer, D. (2011). Tacit guidance for collaborative multimedia learning. Computers in Human Behavior,27(3), 1079–1086. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.05.016Chen, B., & Bryer, T. (2012). Investigating instructional strategies for using social media in formal and informallearning. The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 13(1), 87–104. doi:10.19173/irrodl.v13i1.1027Erkens, M., Schlottbom, P., & Bodemer, D. (2016). Qualitative and quantitative information in cognitive groupawareness tools: Impact on collaborative learning. In U. Cress (Ed.), Transforming Learning,Empowering Learners: The International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) 2016.Singapore: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Friedkin, N. E., & Johnsen, E. C. (1997). Social positions in influence networks. Social Networks, 19(3), 209–222. doi:10.1016/S0378-8733(96)00298-5Hew, K. F., Cheung, W. S., & Ng, C. S. L. (2010). Student contribution in asynchronous online discussion: areview of the research and empirical exploration. Instructional Science, 38(6), 571–606.doi:10.1007/s11251-008-9087-0Janssen, J., & Bodemer, D. (2013). Coordinated computer-supported collaborative learning: Awareness andawareness tools. Educational Psychologist, 48(1), 40–55. doi:10.1080/00461520.2012.749153Kirschner, P. A. (2015). Facebook as learning platform: Argumentation superhighway or dead-end street?Computers in Human Behavior, 53(Supplement C), 621–625. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2015.03.011Kuhn, D., Wang, Y., & Li, H. (2010). Why argue? Developing understanding of the purposes and values ofargumentative discourse. Discourse Processes, 48(1), 26–49. doi:10.1080/01638531003653344Leitão, S. (2000). The potential of argument in knowledge building. Human Development, 43(6), 332–360. doi:10.1159/000022695Luarn, P., & Hsieh, A.-Y. (2014). Speech or silence: The effect of user anonymity and member familiarity onthe willingness to express opinions in virtual communities. Online Information Review, 38(7), 881–895. doi:10.1108/OIR-03-2014-0076Manca, S., & Ranieri, M. (2013). Is it a tool suitable for learning? A critical review of the literature onFacebook as a technology-enhanced learning environment. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning,29(6), 487–504. doi:10.1111/jcal.12007Morey, A. C., Jr, W. P. E., & Hutchens, M. J. (2012). The “who” matters: Types of interpersonal relationshipsand avoidance of political disagreement. Political Communication, 29(1), 86–103.doi:10.1080/10584609.2011.641070Preece, J., Nonnecke, B., & Andrews, D. (2004). The top five reasons for lurking: improving communityexperiences for everyone. Computers in Human Behavior, 20(2), 201–223.Puhl, T., Tsovaltzi, D., & Weinberger, A. (2015). Blending Facebook discussions into seminars for practicingargumentation. Computers in Human Behavior, 53, 605–616. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2015.04.006Sadler, T. D., & Donnelly, L. A. (2006). Socioscientific Argumentation: The effects of content knowledge andmorality. International Journal of Science Education, 28(12), 1463–1488.Simonneaux, L. (2007). Argumentation in science education: An overview. In S. Erduran & M. P. JiménezAleixandre (Eds.) Argumentation in Science Education (pp. 179-199). Springer, Dordrecht.Tsovaltzi, D., Judele, R., Puhl, T., & Weinberger, A. (2015). Scripts, individual preparation and groupawareness support in the service of learning in Facebook: How does CSCL compare to socialnetworking sites? Computers in Human Behavior, 53, 577–592. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2015.04.067Tsovaltzi, D., Puhl, T., Judele, R., & Weinberger, A. (2014). Group awareness support and argumentationscripts for individual preparation of arguments in Facebook. Computers & Education, 76, 108-118.Zeidler, D. L., & Nichols, B. H. (2009). Socioscientific issues: Theory and practice. Journal of ElementaryScience Education, 21(2), 49. doi:10.1007/BF03173684ICLS 2018 Proceedings463© ISLS