Challenges in Implementing Small Group Collaboration in LargeOnline CoursesJulia Erdmann, Ruhr-University Bochum, julia.erdmann@rub.deNikol Rummel, Ruhr-University Bochum, nikol.rummel@rub.deNina Christmann, Ruhr-University Bochum, christmann@iaw.ruhr-uni-bochum.deMalte Elson, Ruhr-University Bochum, malte.elson@rub.deTobias Hecking, University of Duisburg-Essen, hecking@collide.infoThomas Herrmann, Ruhr-University Bochum, herrmann@iaw.ruhr-uni-bochum.deH. Ulrich Hoppe, University of Duisburg-Essen, hoppe@collide.infoNicole C. Krämer, University of Duisburg-Essen, nicole.kraemer@uni-due.deElias Kyewski, University of Duisburg-Essen, elias.kyewski@uni-due.deAstrid Wichmann, Ruhr-University Bochum, astrid.wichmann@rub.deAbstract: Large online courses typically suffer from a lack of possibilities for socialinteraction among participants. One approach for facilitating social interaction is small groupcollaboration. Successfully implementing small group collaboration in online courses,however, is not an easy task. In two iterations of a large online course, we first identifiedimplementation problems and their possible causes (Course 1: N = 270), and subsequentlytested possibilities of mitigation and corresponding improvements (Course 2: N = 111). Theproblems identified in Course 1 included a high dropout rate, low participation in group work,and low course satisfaction. These are typical problems in large online courses. However,their significance increases when they occur in the context of small group collaboration.Changes on the structural but also on the social level in Course 2 improved coursesatisfaction, but did not lower dropout rate nor did it increase participation in group work.IntroductionLarge online courses are increasingly used as a format of instruction in higher education. The presupposedaffordances of these courses are that they are resource efficient and allow for more flexible time managementthan traditional courses. They are therefore assumed to fit every student’s time schedule and thus to reach abroader student population (Hollands & Tirthali, 2014). However, typical problems in large online courses arethat students exhibit motivational deficits, time management issues, and lack of individual accountability, whichresults in high dropout rates (Yang, Sinha, Adamson & Rosé, 2013). Research provides evidence that socialinteraction in the form of small group collaboration has the potential to counteract these problems (Rosé,Goldman, Zoltners Scherer & Resnick, 2015, Machemer, 2007). However, so far, in most large online coursesthe focus lies on individual learning activities.Making small group collaboration successful is a major challenge, even in traditional classroomsettings (Asterhan & Schwarz, 2016). When collaboration takes place in a computer-mediated setting, makingthe group work successful is an even greater challenge, because the cues that facilitate communication in faceto-face interaction are reduced. Thus, the participants’ required effort to communicate effectively is higher(Clark & Brennan, 1991). One of the requirements for effective group collaboration is the participants’ activeengagement in explorative and discursive meaning making processes (Herrmann & Kienle, 2008). Research inCSCL shows that intensive support of these processes is necessary to ensure successful learning. This support isoften given in the form of scripts (Weinberger, Stegmann & Fischer, 2010). In addition to such scripts, theinstructor’s support (Kearsley, 2000) or sophisticated computer-generated adaptive support (Rosé et al. 2015) isalso important for effective small group collaboration. Most of the research on small group collaboration inonline courses concerns courses with only a very small number of participants, allowing for intensive support bythe instructor. In research on online courses with a high number of participants the group work is mostlyproject-oriented and on a voluntary basis (e.g. Rosé et al., 2015), which means students are likely to be highlyintrinsically motivated.Given the characteristics of previous research, the following question comes to mind: do the positiveeffects of small group collaboration also occur when the number of participants does not allow for intensivesupport of the collaborative process or when students do not participate on a voluntary basis? As activeparticipation can be seen as a prerequisite for small group collaboration to be effective, our studies had twoaims. The first aim was to investigate whether students actively participate in mandatory small groupcollaboration in large online courses. The second aim was to identify challenges associated with activeCSCL 2017 Proceedings625© ISLSparticipation, and to investigate how these challenges can be overcome to successfully implement small groupcollaboration into these courses without continuous adaptive support (from instructors or computer generated).Our approach is of interest for distance education as well as for universities that run online courses on-campus,and for large online course formats such as Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs).MethodsTo achieve our goals, we ran two consecutive large online courses at university level, for which students couldreceive credits. In both courses, participants collaborated in small groups of three or four students in severaliterations. We analyzed the data of Course 1 to identify possible challenges of small group collaboration, andtested the effectiveness of a re-design to address these challenges in Course 2.Course 1Course- and group work designThe subject of the course was “psychological principles of computer mediated communication”. It includedtopics like “Transactive Memory” and “Scripting in CSCL”. Moodle, which was used to run the course, is acommonly used learning platform in higher education. Participants had the possibility to engage in differentlearning activities and interact with various materials: an introductory video, relevant literature, quizzes andindividual as well as collaborative assignments. Completing the assignments and the quizzes was mandatory forreceiving the course credits. The study was conducted as part of an online university-level course. The coursewas open for students of different study programs at Ruhr-Universität Bochum and the University of DuisburgEssen. Of 324 course participants, 270 participants gave their consent to include their data in our research. Thecourse ran for a total of 14 weeks.As already mentioned above, the course consisted of several types of course activities, including sixsmall group collaboration phases in the second half of the course (phase 1: n = 72 [18 groups]; phase 2: n = 63[16 groups]; phase 3: n = 62 [16 groups]; phase 4: n = 123 [31 groups]; Phase 5: n = 122 [31 groups]). Thegroup collaboration of one phase could not be included in the data analysis due to technical difficulties. Thedifferent numbers of participants in the different phases are due to the dropout rate as well as the structure of thecourse, as in phases 1, 2 and 3 half of the participants did not work collaboratively but individually. In each ofthe four phases, participants were randomly assigned to small groups of three to four group members each. Toavoid repeated inclusion of non-active participants, participants were dismissed from the course if they missedtwo or more assignments or quizzes. In each phase, students wrote a text to answer an open-ended questionabout the contents of that particular week. To allow students flexibility in time, we chose a written format whichdid not require students to work synchronously on the task. Students were supposed to discuss and coordinate ina group forum and collaboratively produce a written text in a real-time text editor. To solve the tasks, it was notenough to reproduce knowledge from the provided learning activities and materials (such as video andliterature). Instead, conceptual knowledge construction (e.g. through explorative learning activities and selfexplanation) was needed for a correct solution. This type of task was supposed to ensure that participants felt theneed to interact with each other in order to correctly solve the task (see Dommel & Garcia-Luna-Aceves, 2000).In addition, the tasks were slightly scripted (e.g. through the allocation of roles). The available time forcompleting each collaborative task was four days.We assessed students’ motivation (at the beginning and at the end of the course) and course satisfactionas well as usability of the system as perceived by students (at the end of the course) via surveys. Course-relatedintrinsic motivation was measured with the IMI (Intrinsic Motivation Inventory) consisting of 24 items on aseven-point likert scale. Satisfaction with the online course was measured with a single item on a seven-pointlikert scale (“I liked the online course”). We measured students’ perceived system usability with the SystemUsability Scale (Brooke, 1997) consisting of ten items on a five-point likert scale.Data analysis and resultsWe analyzed the following variables: dropout rate, participation in group work (relative number of groups withone or more inactive members) as well as motivation, system usability, and course satisfaction.Of 270 participants at the beginning of the course, 122 were still active at the end of the course. Thisleads to an overall dropout rate of 55%. In all four phases, the relative number of groups with one or moreinactive group members was 33-48%. Motivation at the beginning of the course (M = 3.31; SD = .81; n = 106;min =1; max=7) was higher than motivation at the end of the course (M = 2.81; SD =.10; n = 27; min: 1 max: 7).CSCL 2017 Proceedings626© ISLSThe distributions of the results in system usability (M = 2.91; SD = .29; n = 64, min: 1 max: 5) and coursesatisfaction (M = 2.98; SD = 1.30; n = 43; min: 1 max: 5) were slightly skewed to the left.DiscussionTypical problems for online courses were encountered, namely low participation and a high dropout rate. Thesephenomena are very well known for large online courses but they are of special relevance in the context of smallgroup collaboration, since they lead to groups with an insufficient number of active group members. Lowparticipation, in turn, may lead to frustration and reluctance to participate for the remaining group members, inthe active group members and thus further decrease active participation. This hinders collaborative learning totake place. Frustration and reluctance may be reflected in the declining course-related intrinsic motivationthroughout the course. Even though participants were dismissed from the course when they did not participate inthe assignments for two or more times and the dropout rate decreased throughout the progression of the course,the rate of groups with one or more inactive group members did not fall below 33%.As organizational factors are extremely important for successfully running a large online course,shortcomings on the organizational level may explain why low participation and high dropout rates occurred inthe first place. Most participants had no experience with online-courses. Hence, some of them did not check forannouncements in their email, and did not see the announcements on a news forum because they did not log into the platform regularly. This led to confusion with respect to current activities and upcoming deadlines.Course 2Course- and group work designOur aim was to increase active participation by improving the course structure and by taking measures topromote more effective communication in the course. We aimed to achieve these improvements by: 1)increasing the clarity of the platform by changes in structure and layout; 2) more distinct communication aboutactivities and deadlines through more than one communication channel. Upcoming deadlines were now postedin a sidebar that was always visible to the students and additionally in a document that provided an overview ofthe activities for the whole course. In addition, if something important needed to be communicated, an emailwas sent to all participants; 3) extending the group work phases to a period of seven days. This gave participantsmore time to get organized and increased their possibilities to interact with each other; 4) asking participants toconfirm their participation in the next upcoming course unit. Participants were only included in the upcominggroup work if they confirmed their participation. Participants were allowed to be absent from groupcollaboration two times throughout the course. This was supposed to help reduce the amount of inactive groupmembers and to raise students’ flexibility as well as increase commitment and individual accountability. Topromote social presence and community building, we implemented an icebreaker session where everyone wasasked to briefly introduce him- or herself and post his or her favorite find on the internet (e.g. a video orpicture). Apart from the aforementioned changes, the course design was the same as in Course 1. The coursewas again open for students of different study programs at Ruhr-University Bochum and the University ofDuisburg-Essen. Of 149 participants, 111 gave their consent to include their data in our research. The course ranfor a total of 13 weeks.The design and procedure of small group collaboration was the same as in Course 1 except for theavailable time for completing each collaborative task (seven days instead of four days). Course 2 included fouriterations of small group work in weeks 6, 8, 10 and 12 of the course: phase 1: n = 76 (20 groups); phase 2: n =37 (10 groups); phase 3: n = 34 (9 groups); phase 4: n = 63 (16 groups).Data analysis and resultsThe same analyses were performed as in Course 1. Of 111 participants at the beginning of the course, 57 werestill active at the end of the course. Thus the dropout rate was 49%. In the four phases of collaboration, therelative number of groups with one or more inactive group members was 33-53%. System usability (M = 3.84;SD = .70; n = 18; min: 1 max: 5) and course satisfaction (M = 4.00; SD = .88; n = 19, min: 1 max: 5) wererelatively high. The motivation questionnaire could not be used for analysis due to technical difficulties,unfortunately.Comparing Course 1 and Course 2No improvement was found concerning the dropout rate (Course 1: 55%; Course 2: 49%), nor concerning therelative number of groups with inactive group members (Course 1: 33-48%; Course 2: 33-53%). Concerning theCSCL 2017 Proceedings627© ISLSself report measures, t-tests revealed significant differences between the courses for system usability (Course 1:M = 2.91; SD = .29; n = 64 vs. Course 2: M = 3.84; SD = .70; n = 18): t(80) = -8.402; p = .001., d = 2.253 andcourse satisfaction (Course 1: M = 2.98; SD = 1.30; n = 43 vs. Course 2: M = 4.00; SD = .88; n = 19): t(60) = 3.121; p = .003, d = 0.933.Overall discussion and outlookIn two iterations of a large online course, we were able to identify low participation and high dropout rate assubstantial problems in small group collaboration. These typical issues do gain special significance in thecontext of small group collaboration, as they lead to an insufficient number of active group members. Hence, ingroups with low participation, (effective) small group collaboration cannot take place.In order to counteract these problems, we identified possible shortcomings in communication andclarity of the platform and implemented improvements in Course 2. Perceived system usability and coursesatisfaction did increase significantly. However, the active participation into group work did not increase, nordid the dropout rate decrease.Thus, the results imply that the changes that mostly concerned the organizational level of the course,were perceived useful. However, the fact that the changes were not effective regarding the reduction ofinactivity and dropout rate raises one major question: How can small group collaboration have positive effectson active participation, motivation and learning outcomes when there is not enough activity and motivation forsmall group collaboration to occur in the first place? Without active student engagement in group work, thepositive effects of group work cannot occur. We hypothesize that without intensive supervision from instructors,active student participation is hard to achieve.As the focus of our studies lay on improvements on the organizational level, we suggest that futureresearch investigates whether active participation in group work in large online courses can be increased bychanges on the social level (e.g. creating more positive interdependence among the group members; see Johnson& Johnson, 2014). Our own future plans for research includes investigating whether participants’ contribution togroup work correlate with their other activities in the online platform. The goal would be to identify behavioralpatterns to characterize participants with low collaborative activity (and possible dropout) as well as studentswith high collaborative activity.ReferencesAsterhan, C. S., & Schwarz, B. B. (2016). Argumentation for Learning: Well-Trodden Paths and UnexploredTerritories. Educational Psychologist, 51(2), 164-187.Brooke, J. (1996). SUS: a quick and dirty usability scale. Usability evaluation in industry, 189(194), 4-7.Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. Resnick, J. M. Levine, & S. D.Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 127-149). Washington, DC: APA.Dommel, H.-P., & Garcia-Luna-Aceves, J. J. (2000). A coordination framework and architecture for Internetgroupware. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 23, 401-427.Herrmann, T., Kienle, A.; (2008): Context-oriented communication and the design of computer-supporteddiscursive learning. Int'l. Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning. Vol. 3, No. 3, S.273-299.Hollands, F. M., & Tirthali, D. (2014). Why do institutions offer MOOCs?. Online Learning Journal, 18(3).Johnson, D.W., & Johnson, R.T. (2014). Cooperative Learning in 21st Century. Anales de psicologia, 30(3),841-851.Kearsley, G. (2000). Online education: Learning and teaching in cyberspace. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.Machemer, P. L. (2007). Student perceptions of active learning in a large cross-disciplinary classroom. ActiveLearning in Higher Education, 8 (1), 9-29.Rosé, C. P., Goldman, P., Zoltners Sherer, J., & Resnick, L. (2015). Supportive technologies for groupdiscussion in MOOCs. Current Issues in Emerging eLearning, 2(1), 5.Weinberger, A., Stegmann, K., & Fischer, F. (2010). Learning to argue online: Scripted groups surpassindividuals (unscripted groups do not). Computers in Human behavior, 26(4), 506-515.Yang, D., Sinha, T., Adamson, D., & Rosé, C. P. (2013). Turn on, tune in, drop out: Anticipating studentdropouts in massive open online courses. In Proceedings of the 2013 NIPS Data-driven educationworkshop (p. 14).CSCL 2017 Proceedings628© ISLS