An Enhanced Framework for Scale Cognition Leveraging VisualMetaphor Theory and Analogical Reasoning TheoryCesar Delgado, North Carolina State University, cesar_delgado@ncsu.eduMatthew Peterson, North Carolina State University, mopeters@ncsu.eduAbstract: Frameworks for size and scale cognition are synthesized, then enhanced by theoryon visual metaphor and analogical reasoning. Future directions developing scale worlds invirtual reality are presented.IntroductionCutting-edge science is conducted at extremes of scale, e.g., nanotechnology. Scale is critical in scienceeducation too. USA science standards posit scale as a crosscutting concept (NRC, 2012). However, studentshave difficulty comprehending (Tretter et al., 2006a, 2006b) and representing (Delgado & Lucero, 2015) scale,and hold inaccurate ideas about the size of scientific entities (e.g., Delgado, 2009). This paper synthesizesframeworks for scale cognition from STEM education, and enhances these with theory on metaphor andanalogy in visual design. The resulting framework can guide research into and development of learningenvironments for scale.BackgroundSTEM education research by Tretter et al. (2006a,b) examined conceptual boundaries of scale conceptions andthe accuracy of estimation of size of objects/distances. They focused on groups of learners and did not examineindividuals’ thinking. Delgado (2009) introduced a framework for ways of thinking about scale, influenced byPiaget (e.g., Inhelder & Piaget, 1969), with two qualitative (ordering, grouping) and two quantitative types(relative, absolute size). Magana et al. (2012) added logical proportional reasoning (LPR): using similaritybetween one ratio of sizes (A:B) and another (C:D), i.e., A:B::C:D (A is to B as C is to D). Kong et al. (2011)developed similar categories starting from nanoscale engineering students’ ideas, but with subtypes for orderingand grouping, plus nanoscale-specific “definition” (being able to define nanometer and nanoscale).Metaphors are foundational tools for learning about the world. In metaphor, aspects of a familiarsource concept are conceptually mapped onto a less familiar target (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). Conceptualmetaphors have an experiential and embodied foundation (Johnson, 1987; Gattis, 2004). Phillips and McQuarrie(2004) identified three structures found in visual metaphor: juxtaposition, fusion, and replacement. Placing a carnext to a jet (juxtaposition) relates the target car to the source jet, which has the attributes of being wellengineered and fast. Visual metaphors have conceptual power, and are linked to attention, elaboration, pleasure,and liking (Phillips, 2003). Peterson (in press) has further developed theory on visual metaphor. Peterson et al.(2015) demonstrated how visual metaphor can elucidate the abstract phenomenon of heat transfer. Visualmetaphor theory is relevant for scale cognition because LPR (A:B::C:D) is a type of metaphor.Analogy conveys that two otherwise distinct situations or domains share relational structure (Gentner& Markman, 1997). For instance, a roughly thousand-fold difference in size (a relational structure) is present ineach of the following A:B pairs, despite including diverse, non-overlapping objects: height of human to ant;diameter of EPCOT’s dome to diameter of a racquetball; diameter of bacterium to thickness of DNA. Theliterature does not achieve consensus on how analogies and metaphors differ, but this does not impact oursynthesis since we deal with visual expressions, where their expressions are roughly equivalent. Metaphor andanalogy in general are efficacious in science education (Christidou et al., 1997; Gentner & Wolff, 2000).Synthesizing scale cognition and visual interpretation theoriesLPR operates on ratios, a specific type of structural relationship. The size relationship between ant and human(~1000x) is familiar and thus it can serve as the source in a metaphor, to better understand the relationship ofbacterium to DNA, a potential target. Examples of visual metaphor include nesting, where one source–targetmapping is then treated as a unit and jointly mapped onto another target. The development of conceptualknowledge in conceptual metaphor theory also involves nesting. Connecting ratios through the use of a commonelement might be particularly meaningful and powerful for learners. Tretter et al. (2006b) found that scientistsconstruct for themselves scale worlds including their everyday, human-scale world and a scale world for theirscientific research (e.g., a nanoscale world). And yet, scientists felt the need to retain a connection among thevarious worlds. The implication for LPR is that chained ratios with a common element – nested LPR (NLPR) –might be more powerful for learning: instead of directly linking A:B::C:D, which lacks a common element, anICLS 2018 Proceedings1607© ISLSA:B::B:C::C:D chain features connections throughout. E.g., human-to-ant size ratio is similar to ant-tobacterium, which in turn is similar to bacterium-to-DNA. This sharing of an element across ratios in an analogyis called cross-mapping (Gentner & Markman, 1997), and has been seen as a mere coincidence and possibledistraction (Yuan, Uttal, & Gentner, 2017); however, we speculate that it might instead be a leverage point forunderstanding scale, if pairs are systematically connected to one another.NLPR raises intriguing possibilities for mediated instruction in size and scale. Virtual reality (VR)holds great potential for scale cognition because it can provide new direct experiences. The familiar is used assource in metaphor, and VR can familiarize learners with entities that are otherwise impossible to directlyexperience. We envision converting the logarithmic scale into a set of virtual rooms populated by scientificentities at corresponding scales. A student’s avatar can stand next to (juxtaposition) or become (fusion) a VRant, and look at an enormous human, or a minuscule bacterium (now directly visible and manipulable).Additional sensory cues can be incorporated, e.g., using grayscale at sizes smaller than the wavelength of visiblelight for representations and environments, haptic feedback to represent vibration at the nanoscale, or dramaticechoes for large spaces. An expanded framework for scale cognition represents an opportunity to improveSTEM education, with learners’ own experiences generating new conceptual knowledge.ReferencesChristidou, V., Kouladis, V., & Christidis, T. (1997). Children’s use of metaphors in relation to their mentalmodels: the case of the ozone layer and its depletion. Research in Science Education, 27(4), 541–552.Delgado, C. (2009). Development of a research-based learning progression for middle school throughundergraduate students’ conceptual understanding of size and scale. Unpublished dissertation,University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.Delgado, C., & Lucero, M. (2015). Scale construction for graphing: An investigation of student resources.Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 52(5), 633–658.Gattis, M. (2004). Mapping relational structure in spatial reasoning. Cognitive Science, 28, 589–610.Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist,52, 45–56.Gentner, D., & Wolff, P. (2000). Metaphor and knowledge change. In E. Dietrich & A. B. Markman (Eds.),Cognitive dynamics: Conceptual change in humans and machines (pp. 295–342). Mahwah, NJ: LEA.Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1969). The early growth of logic in the child, classification and seriation. (E.A. Lunzer & D. Papert, Trans.). New York: W. W. Norton & Co.Johnson, M. (1987). The body in the mind: The bodily basis of meaning, imagination, and reason. Chicago,IL: University of Chicago Press.Kong, Y., Douglas, K. A., Rodgers, K., Diefex-Dux, H., & Madhavan, K. (2017). A size and scale frameworkfor guiding curriculum design and assessment. Journal of Engineering Education, 106(3), 431-453.Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980/2003). Metaphors we live by. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.Magana, A. J., Brophy, S. P., & Bryan, L. A. (2012). An integrated knowledge framework to characterize andscaffold size and scale cognition. International Journal of Science Education, 34(14), 2181–2203.NRC (National Research Council). (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscuttingconcepts, and core ideas. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.Peterson, M. (in press). Aspects of visual metaphor: An operational taxonomy of visual rhetoric for research inadvertising. International Journal of Advertising.Peterson, M., Wise, K., Lindgren, R., Cox, D., & Mathayas, N. (2015). Understanding and implementing visualmetaphor [white paper]. Urbana, IL: Illinois Learning Sciences Design Initiative. Retrieved fromhttp://textimage.org/indexing/pdf/Understanding-Visual-Metaphor.pdf.Phillips, B. J. (2003). Understanding visual metaphor in advertising. In L. Scott, & R. Batra (Eds.), Persuasiveimagery: A consumer response perspective (pp. 297–310). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum AssociatesPhillips, B. J., & McQuarrie, E. F. (2004). Beyond visual metaphor: A new typology of visual rhetoric inadvertising. Marketing Theory, 4, 113–136.Tretter, T., Jones, G., Andre, T., Negishi, A., & Minogue, J. (2006a). Conceptual boundaries and distances:Students’ and experts’ concepts of the scale of scientific phenomena. Journal of Research in ScienceTeaching, 43, 282–319.Tretter, T. R., Jones, M. G., & Minogue, J. (2006b). Accuracy of scale conceptions in science: Mentalmaneuverings across many orders of spatial magnitude. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,43(10), 1061–1085.Yuan, L., Uttal, D., & Gentner, D. (2017). Analogical processes in children’s understanding of spatialrepresentations. Developmental Psychology, 53(6), 1098–1114.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1608© ISLS