Recounting Counting: Self-Appraisal in Math-Adjacent DiscourseSuraj Uttamchandani, Indiana University, suttamch@indiana.eduKylie Peppler, Indiana University, kpeppler@indiana.eduAbstract: This study illuminates how women position their relationship to everyday textilecraft practices (e.g., knitting, sewing, crocheting) and to mathematics. We employ discursivepsychology and conversation analysis to analyze interviews with crafters. Rather than just (not)being “math people,” preliminary findings reveal that speakers discursively orient tomathematics as consisting of both “lower-level” and “higher-level” categories, and speakersappraise their own mathematical abilities with regard to each.Keywords: math, gender, discourseBackgroundThis study focuses on how women position their own competence in mathematics to illuminate when and howinstitutional environments erect barriers to participation. We focus on self-appraisals of mathematical ability madeby women who engage in textile crafting practices and contrast this with their appraisals of their abilities in mathin formalized schooling environments. Textile practices have been recognized as sites where rich mathematicalreasoning occurs (Harris, 1997), as well as sites with historically deeply engagement from women (Barber, 1994).However, it is likely that both crafters and non-crafters have inadequately recognized the math inherent in craftingto be “legitimate” or “real,” and therefore not capitalized on the potential of crafting to open up trajectories thatlead to success in formal math learning environments.Methodological approach and methodsThe learning sciences has historically focused on the role of discourse in mathematics learning (e.g., Sfard &Cobb, 2014). In this study, we analyze 13 interviews with women who have experience with weaving, sewing,crocheting, or knitting, in which participants were asked to discuss their textile crafting practices and makeconnections to mathematical thinking. We focus on the interactive and discursive features of the interview,drawing upon discursive psychology (Edwards & Potter, 1992) and conversation analysis (Heritage, 1984). Ourgoal is to explore the questions: (RQ1) How do crafters position math as “school math,” “craft math,” or in someother way, and (RQ2) How do crafters position themselves in relation to these various sorts of math?Initial findingsAs a case instance, in the following extract, “Bianca”, a crafter with experience sewing, knitting, and crocheting,and the interviewer are discussing the mathematical nature of crafts in an online video-conferencing platform.Before the extract, Bianca explained how she made some stuffed animals. Bianca begins by assessing themathiness of knitting. In so doing, she quickly makes a distinction between counting and higher math and qualifiesher experience with each of these two types of math (“I” is short for “interviewer”).A.1A.2A.3A.4A.5A.6A.7A.8A.9A.10A.11A.12A.13I:Bianca:I:Bianca:I:Bianca:ICLS 2018 ProceedingsDo you find that you need mathematics to make those crafts, ordoes that seem just sort of (.2) uh (.6) not so (.2) so: obvious.Well I mean I think knitting is kind of at its base it is mathematicalcus it’s all about counting (.2) um and not (.) sort of any sort ofhigher math or or I I’ve never really done any sort of (1.2) likemath-based patterns that you know. (1.4) like I I’m kind of awareof it, (.2) but you do have to keep counting.[Right][Um] (1.0) and I know that there are people who do design patternsthat are based on math. [which][right]think are cool erm but I’ve never: (.2) yknow either sought themout or made my own patterns or anything like that1509© ISLSIn this extract, the interviewer asks Bianca if her craft (knitting) tends to “need mathematics” (A.1). Thisis set up as a choice between finding that math is necessary or that math’s presence is less obvious—thus thepreferred response is agreement that math is present, and in practice the question is more about how obvious thismathematics is. Bianca offers that knitting is mathematical “cus it’s all about counting” (A.4), which constructscounting as a part of mathematics. Furthermore, counting and mathematics are established as having a strongcorrelation as knitting is “all” about counting (A.4). The language of “at its base” (A.3) functions to demonstratehow inseparable the math and the counting are. Bianca elaborates without prompting that the knitting has“not…any sort of higher math” (A.4–A.5). She presents a non-counting kind of math that is both “higher” (moredifficult) and not present in knitting, which in turn may function to establish why a knitter might not be expectedto be competent in this kind of higher math. While noting that she has never done any “math-based patterns”(A.6), Bianca would be contradictory had she been referring to math as counting, so “math” is interpreted here asreferring to the amorphous “higher math.” The language of “base” and “based” (A.3, A.6, emphasized on A.10)position math as something that underlies or is fundamental to knitting, rather than as something that sits on topof or is extraneous to knitting. Although Bianca has “never” (A.5, A.12) used math-based patterns, she emphasizesthat she is aware of them (A.6), which places a qualifier on her inexperience and serves to position her as notentirely incompetent with this topic. In summary, Bianca does note that knitting has counting and possibly not“any sort of higher math,” thus constructing counting and higher math as two opposing kinds of math (RQ#1).She goes on to carefully explicate her experience with each of the two, noting that the former is necessary to herknitting “at its base,” while the latter is something she is “kind of aware of” but has “never really done” (RQ #2).DiscussionA key finding of this study is that the women crafters interviewed appraised their own mathematical competencyby separating math into multiple parts (e.g., higher and lower) and positioning themselves relative to each.Constructing two kinds of math functions to allow speakers to position themselves in variable ways with regardto math. It is possible that this in turn allows speakers to (a) account for their self-appraisal as less capable inhigher-level math or (b) position themselves as especially competent since they are capable at both types of math.In so doing, speakers may tacitly or implicitly resist simplistic identities as “math people” or “not math people.”These findings have deep implications for the study of mathematical self-appraisal. Rather than simply treatingpeople as “math people” or as having a stable-low or stable-high mathematical self-appraisal, a discursivepsychology (DP) approach revealed much deeper complexity in how and why speakers construct a representationof mathematics as a subject and their own abilities therein. By focusing on what speakers do in talk, DP can revealflexible, occasioned, and fluid understandings of mathematical ability. These findings also have potentialimplications for the design of learning environments that seek to encourage learners to engage with mathematicalconcepts and thus broaden participation in STEM. Learning environments should explicitly call attention to thedepth of the mathematical work being done therein, illustrating to learners that they are engaging in “higher” mathwhen they are. Relatedly, these environments might also seek to reposition productive, useful kinds of math—like the kind of “basic” arithmetic that powerfully can be used to accomplish textile crafting—as not necessarilybeing of a “lower level” than more abstract kinds of math (Papert, 1980). This approach in turn may invite learnersto position themselves as legitimate participants in deeper mathematical practices.ReferencesBarber, E.W. 1994. Women’s work - The first 20,000 years: Women, cloth and society in early times. New York:W.W. Norton.Edwards, D. & Potter, J. (1992). Discursive psychology. Sage Publications.Harris, M. (1997). Common Threads: Women, Mathematics, and Work. Trentham Books.Heritage, J. (1984). Garfinkel and ethnomethodology. John Wiley & Sons.Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. Basic Books, Inc.Sfard, A., & Cobb, P. (2014). Research in mathematics education: What can it teach us about humanlearning?. The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences, 545-63.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1420303awarded to Kylie Peppler and Melissa Gresalfi. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendationsexpressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National ScienceFoundation. Thank you to Janis Watson for editorial assistance. Members of the Creativity Labs, Daniel Hickey,and Jessica Lester helped provide key insights in this work.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1510© ISLS