Rethinking the Teaching and Learning of Area MeasurementNicole Panorkou, Montclair State University, panorkoun@montclair.eduAbstract: This study focused on exploring an innovative way of teaching and learningmeasurement, what we refer to as Dynamic Measurement or DYME. Without relying on thecommon approach of counting square units, our goal was to engage students in contextuallyrich digital dynamic tasks to visualize area as a continuous quantity and evaluate the area of arectangular region as a multiplicative relationship between the two lengths of the sides. In thispaper, we briefly describe the iterative process of designing, testing and refining the tasks forDYME pointing to the significance of the design for developing students’ thinking of area aslength times width.Geometric measurement: What we know and pushing forwardExtensive research on measurement has described the importance of using square units to cover rectangularsurfaces and quantify that covering by counting the square units (e.g. Barrett & Clements, 2003; Battista,Clements, Arnoff, Battista & Borrow, 1998; Izsak, 2005; Kamii & Kysh, 2006). For instance, we can use twenty1 sq. inch tiles to cover a 5 by 4 inches rectangle as in Figure 1a and claim that its area is 20 sq. inches. Similarto these studies, the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics (CCSSO, 2010) in the United Statesintroduce third grade students to area measurement first by counting unit squares in a rectangular surface, thusforming an array (Content standards 3.MD.C.5 and 3.MD.C.6). Next, the standards assume that students willuse this tiling experience to “show that the area is the same as would be found by multiplying the side lengths”(3.MD.C.7.A). However, the standards do not provide information on how students will transition fromcounting individual units to constructing the multiplicative area formula.Figure 1. Progression of structuring area based on a synthesis of the measurement literature.Although the measurement research studies mentioned above suggest a progression of structuring area(Figure 1 a-d), to understand how area is generated by multiplying lengths is a different notion conceptuallyfrom the construction of a matrix like shown in Figure 1d. As Piaget et al. (1960) argued, “the differencebetween the two operational mechanisms is the difference between a matrix which is made up of a limitednumber of elements and one which is thought of as a continuous structure with an infinite number of elements”(p. 350). Indeed, area, length and width are continuous quantities (Kamii & Kysh, 2006) that are relatedmultiplicatively while covering a surface with discrete unit squares is one-dimensional and additive in nature(e.g. Outhred & Mitchelmore, 2000; Reynolds & Wheatley, 1996).As a result, this study aimed to go beyond the static perspective of understanding area as the countingof discrete square units and find a more intuitive and accessible approach of illustrating area as a continuousquantity that involves a multiplicative relationship between length and width. To do that, we built on the workof Confrey et al. (2012) and Lehrer, Slovin, Dougherty, & Zbiek (2014) on visualizing area as a ‘sweep’ of aline segment of length a over a distance of b to produce a rectangle of area ab.Figure 2. Visualizing area as a continuous structure through ‘sweeping.’ICLS 2018 Proceedings863© ISLSFor instance, imagine a paint roller with length 5 inches sweeping for a distance of 6 inches andgenerating a surface of 30 square inches (Figure 2). In this approach, which we refer to as DynamicMeasurement or DYME, area can be visualized as a continuous dynamic quantity which depends on both thelength of the roller (length) and the distance of the swipe (width). DYME involves engaging students in dynamicexperiences of generating 2D surfaces and 3D shapes by iteratively (and multiplicatively) composing lowerdimensional objects (linear measures).Aims and methodsOur goal was to examine the potential of DYME as an innovative pathway for teaching and learning areameasurement. More specifically, we aimed to explore:a) What type of tasks may be designed for developing students’ DYME reasoning?b) How do these tasks assist students in thinking of area as a continuous quantity?To provide the experience of visualizing area as a continuous quantity, we used the ‘dragging’ and‘trace’ features of Geometer’s Sketchpad (GSP) (Jackiw, 1995) to design a set of tasks. We conducted designexperiments (Brown, 1992; Cobb, Confrey, diSessa, Lehrer & Shauble, 2003) with six pairs of third-graders andhad 6-10 sessions of 45-90 minutes with each pair of students. The students represented various abilitiesaccording to their teacher and all students had some instruction on area as tiling the year before the designexperiment. A design experiment starts by formulating some initial conjectures, and these conjectures evolvefollowing an iterative cycle of design, enactment, analysis and redesign:On the reflective side, design experiments are conjecture-driven tests, often at several levelsof analysis. The initial design is a conjecture about the means of supporting a particular formof learning that is to be tested. During the conduct of the design study, however, morespecialized conjectures are typically framed and tested (Cobb et al., 2003, p. 10).These conjectures evolve throughout the duration of the design study including further iterations thatcontinue in the form of follow-up design experiments. Drawing on the existing literature on area measurement,we gathered measurement constructs identified in previous studies (e.g. indirect/direct measurement, measuringwith no gaps or overlaps) and wondered, “How can this construct be interpreted/modified/used in terms ofDYME?” We used these wonderings to design some initial tasks and framed humble theories (conjectures)about prospective interactions between our task design and the students’ responses. We examined the changes instudents’ thinking about area when interacting with the DYME tasks, and modified and refined the task designaccordingly. During this ongoing analysis (Cobb & Gravemeijer, 2008), our initial conjectures evolved and wemodified the tasks in light of iterative examinations of changes in students’ thinking about area when interactingwith the DYME tasks. The goal of this ongoing analysis (Table 1) was to develop iterative cycles of inventionand revision of tasks and humble theories (Cobb et al., 2003). The following section describes in brief thisiterative design process aiming to illustrate how our task sequence was constructed.Table 1: Description of ongoing analysisDesigning tasks for DYMEInfluenced by the work of Thompson (1993; 1994) on quantitative reasoning, our goal was to design meaningfultasks around a storyline that would illustrate area as an attribute that measures the space covered by arectangular shape. Aiming to trigger students’ interest, we developed an overarching storyline, where studentsbecome part of a “Maker Team” that solves a series of DYME challenges embedded in an interactive digitalICLS 2018 Proceedings864© ISLSbook. To illustrate the continuous nature of area we used the context of painting with paint rollers (Confrey etal., 2012; Lehrer et al. 2014) where we asked students to color surfaces by dragging a roller of a given lengthover varying distances and also dragging rollers of different lengths over the same distance (Figure 3). The taskintroduces the quantities of ‘length of a paint roller’ as the length of a rectangle, ‘rolling distance of the paintroller’ as the width of a rectangle, and the ‘space covered by the paint roller’ as the area of the rectangle. Ourhumble theory was that by providing students with opportunities to create a rectangular surface throughdragging and tracing, they would develop an understanding of area as a continuous quantity that depends on twoother continuous quantities: the length of roller and the rolling distance.Figure 3. Dragging a roller of a given length over varying distances.Indeed, the dynamic nature of the task enabled students to visualize area as a continuous structure andhelped them recognize that the length of the roller and the rolling distance define the size of a shape. As theycould drag the roller as far as they could, students reasoned that, “the further we drag the roller, the bigger theshape we create.” Although the task was successful in presenting those quantities as continuous, it did notprovide us with evidence that students a) realized that they need to coordinate both quantities (length of rollerand rolling distance) in order to make judgments about size and that b) they connected these dynamicexperiences of generating area to the more ‘static’ length and the width measures of a rectangle.Subsequently, we thought to engage students in experiences where they had to modify a shape to fitanother shape, in order to create the need for considering both the base and height when comparing two shapes.(Due to the ambiguity of the word ‘length’ we used the terms ‘base’ and ‘height’ in the beginning, and ‘length’and ‘width’ later.) Thus, in the next set of tasks we asked the students to modify envelops to fit the size of somecards. Students had to change only the base or the height or both on the envelop (Figure 4a). Then students wereasked to color each envelop they created by modifying the length of a paint roller and dragging the roller over adistance to color the whole shape (Figure 4b).Indeed, through task 4a students’ articulations showed that they began looking at both the base and theheight of the rectangle to compare two shapes. Examples included, “the height needs to change and the baseremains the same, because it’s the same [the base] as the envelope’s.” Additionally, task 4b assisted students inconnecting the dynamic experiences of painting to the static attributes of a rectangle, such as “If the height is 8,so you are gonna want to make the length of the paint roller 8 cm too so that it can match. If the base is 10 thenthe distance of paint should be 10 cm.” Although our design up to this point was successful in assisting studentsin comparing two shapes by comparing and making inferences about their dimensions, students still could notrelate their dimensions multiplicatively.ICLS 2018 Proceedings865© ISLS(a)(b)Figure 4. (a) Modifying the base and/or height of the rectangle to fit in the card, (b) Coloring the envelop usinga paint roller.This led to a reformulation of our humble theory to include the conjecture that students could reach tothe goal of length times width if they recognize the proportional relationship between length and area (when onedimension is constant.) Subsequently, we designed tasks that asked students to explore ways to double/half arectangular parking space designed by GSP (Figure 5). Through this task, students recognized that todouble/halve the area they needed to double/halve the length or the width. Although this task helped students tomove from non-numeric covariation (“The bigger the roller the bigger the shape”) to expressing covariationnumerically (“If I double the length, the area is doubled”) providing some evidence of understanding themultiplicative relationship that underlies length and area, still they were not able to identify the multiplicativerelationship of the formula.Figure 5. Students double the length of a rectangle to double the area.Therefore, our focus shifted on research about iterating a fixed unit to find area (Izsak 2005;Lehrer, 2003). We conjectured that if students could iterate a roller of a fixed length (e.g. 1 inch) to cover asurface, they would consider the distance covered in one swipe of the roller with the number of swipes, andconstruct a repeating pattern for covering the shape (Outhred & Mitchelmore, 2000; Reynolds & Wheatley,1996). This involved identifying that a length can be partitioned into a number of equal–sized units (Izsak 2005;Lehrer, 2003), which in our case would mean 1-inch rollers. To do that, we designed a task where students hadto paint shapes of different lengths and widths using a single 1-inch roller (Figure 6). Students’ articulationsshowed that the task design encouraged students to describe area using the multiplicative ‘times’ language, suchas “this is 30 [bottom right rectangle in Figure 6] because the base is 10 and we are going to swipe three times”or “we need to do 10 three times.”ICLS 2018 Proceedings866© ISLSFigure 6. Students use 1-inch rollers to paint walls of different lengths and widths.Aiming to show that the position of the roller can vary and also illustrate the commutativity of themultiplicative relationship in our design, we constructed tasks where the roller was placed vertically or on theright of the shape (Figure 7). Viewing both the horizontal and the vertical alignment of the roller led togeneralizations like “4 swipes of 5 cover the space as 5 swipes of 4.”Figure 7. Students use 1-inch rollers in various positions and reason about the space covered.Although our conjecture of iterating a 1-inch roller along the length of a rectangle was helpful forexpressing the space covered multiplicatively, still students were not able to describe area as base times height.This led to a reformulation of our humble theory. Our next conjecture was that central to the construction of thearea formula would be to give students a roller with the same length as the height of the rectangle and help themidentify that a 3-inch roller covers the same space as three 1-inch rollers. For example, students painted aICLS 2018 Proceedings867© ISLSrectangle of base 4 units and height 3 units using a roller of 3 units (Figure 8). We observed that to find thespace covered, students began decomposing mentally the large roller to 1-inch rollers. They realized thatdecomposing the length into unit lengths does not affect the area, for example, “we could cut a 3-inch rollerinto 3 parts and go across 3 times for a distance of 4, the shape will cover 12.” Engaging students in these taskshelped them visualize a large swipe as a composite of 1-inch swipes. As we progressed towards the finalsessions of the design experiments, students gradually distanced from the terminology of rollers and beganusing length times width intuitively recognizing that the height of a shape shows the number of 1-inch swipesand the base shows the rolling distance.Figure 8. Students cover a rectangular park with grass rollers of different measurements.Using the 1-inch rollers and iterating was a compromise we had made in our design in order for thestudents to think multiplicatively about the relationship between length, width and area. As students’multiplicative thinking of area developed further, our next conjecture was that students could use thisknowledge to think about the proportional relationship between length and area. We designed tasks, such as theone we had in Figure 6, and also included tasks for students to recognize that in order to split area (fractionalthinking), they need to split the length or the width. The tasks engaged students in creating shapes that have afraction of an area of another shape. For example, students were asked to create a cafeteria which is 1/4 of an 8by 5 inches garden (Figure 9) and argued that “If we split this into four parts, then one of the parts will be thecafeteria. It would be 2 inches [the height of the cafeteria] because the if we use only 1-inch roller it would go 8times across but if you use 2-inch roller then it would go 1,2,3, and that would go 4 parts.”Figure 9. Students create a cafeteria which is ¼ of an 8 by 5 inches gardenICLS 2018 Proceedings868© ISLSAdditionally, we wanted to test the conjecture that students could use this dynamic measurementknowledge to recognize area as a multiple of its dimensions and identify factors that give the same area. Ourtasks involve asking students to create different rectangles of the same area (e.g. 12 sq. inches) (Figure 10). Thisconnects area measurement to geometry and the concept of congruence by recognizing congruent shapes indifferent orientations (e.g. 2 x 6 or 6 x 2) and describing congruence by using geometric motions, such asrotation (Huang & Witz, 2011). It also directly relates to the properties of multiplication (e.g. commutativeproperty) as well as factors and multiples, for example during this task students stated, “length 4 and width 3 isdoing 4 swipes of 3. This is same as two swipes of 6, so length 2 and width 6.” Although students were notasked to paint as they did in previous explorations, we provided paint rollers as a resource. We found that theserollers became a powerful tool to help students visualize the size of covered spaces and for transitioning fromsweeping-based reasoning to reasoning about area as length times width.Figure 10. Students create stores that have area of 12 sq. inches and different length and width from other stores.Concluding remarksThis study examined a dynamic way of learning and teaching measurement. The aim of this paper was toillustrate the iterative process of designing tasks for DYME aiming to show how the task design and thesequence of tasks evolved to assist students in visualizing the multiplicative relationship underlying the areaformula. The examples of student behavior presented in this paper illustrate some of the ways that students’thinking of area progressed through the study. Results showed that the paint rollers were a very powerful toolfor students in visualizing area as a continuous, dynamic structure defined by two quantities: length and width.Students also used this knowledge to understand more advanced notions such as scaling, factors and fractions.This paper presented a snapshot of the first cycle of design experiments. In subsequent cycles, thatincluded whole classroom design experiments, we explored further how students’ thinking progresses throughthe particular tasks and designed a learning trajectory (Simon, 1995), illustrating how students’ DYMEreasoning may develop over time (Panorkou, 2017). The overall study shows DYME’s potential as a route toarea measurement that would make the multiplicative formula of area more intuitive and accessible. Thesefindings are also useful for continuing the discussion around the potential of technology to change what ispossible to learn. In the future, we plan to examine further how DYME thinking may assist students in makingconnections between various mathematical ideas, such as multiplication/division, fractions, transformations, andcovariation. We are also currently exploring how DYME may be extended to non-rectangular surfaces andvolume in the later years of schooling.ICLS 2018 Proceedings869© ISLSReferencesBarrett, J. E., & Clements, D. H. (2003). Quantifying path length: Fourth-grade children's developingabstractions for linear measurement. Cognition and Instruction, 21(4), 475-520.Battista, M. T., Clements, D. H., Arnoff, J., Battista, K., & Borrow, C. V. A. (1998). Students' spatial structuringof 2D arrays of squares. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 29(5), 503-532.Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. The journal of the learning sciences, 2(2), 141-178.Cobb, P., Confrey, J., Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educational research.Educational researcher, 32(1), 9-13.Cobb, P., & Gravemeijer, K. (2008). Experimenting to support and understand learning processes. In A. E.Kelly, R. A. Lesh, & J. Y. Baek (Eds.) Handbook of design research methods in education:Innovations in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics learning and teaching, (pp. 68–95).New York: Routledge.Confrey J., Nguyen K., Lee K., Corley A., Panorkou N. & Maloney A. (2012) Learning Trajectories,Descriptors, & Bridging Standards for the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics. NorthCarolina State University. Raleigh.Huang, H.-M. E., & Witz, K. G. (2011). Developing children's conceptual understanding of area measurement:A curriculum and teaching experiment. Learning and instruction, 21(1), 1-13.Izsak, A. (2005). " You Have to Count the Squares": Applying Knowledge in Pieces to Learning RectangularArea. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(3), 361-403.Jackiw, N. (1995). The geometer's sketchpad, v3. 0. Key Curriculum, California.Kamii, C., & Kysh, J. (2006). The difficulty of “length×width”: Is a square the unit of measurement? Journal ofMathematical Behavior, 25(2), 105-115.Lehrer, R. (2003). Developing understanding of measurement. In J. Kilpatrick, W. G. Martin, & D. E. Schifter(Eds.), A research companion to principles and standards for school mathematics (pp. 179-192).Reston, VA: NCTM.Lehrer, R., Slovin, H., Dougherty, B., & Zbiek, R. (2014). Developing essential understanding of geometry andmeasurement for teaching mathematics in grades 3–5. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers ofMathematics.Outhred, L.N. and Mitchelmore, M.C.: 2000, ‘Young children’s intuitive understanding of rectangular areameasurement’, Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 31(2), 144–167.Panorkou, N. (2017) Dynamic Measurement: The crossroad of area and multiplication. In E. Galindo & J.Newton, (Eds.), Proceedings of the 39th annual meeting of the North American Chapter of theInternational Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education (pp. 339-346). Indianapolis, IN:Hoosier Association of Mathematics Teacher Educators.Piaget, J., Inhelder, B., & Szeminska, A. (1960). The child's conception of geometry. London: Routledge &Kegan Paul.Reynolds, A., & Wheatley, G. (1996). Elementary students’ construction and coordination of units in an areasetting. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 27(5), 564–581.Simon, M. A. (1995). Reconstructing mathematics pedagogy from a constructivist perspective. Journal forResearch in Mathematics Education, 26(2), 114-145.Simon, M. A., & Blume, G. W. (1994). Building and understanding multiplicative relationships: A study ofpreservice teachers. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 25(5), 472-494.Steffe, L. (2003). Fractional commensurate, composition, and adding schemes: Learning trajectories of Jasonand Laura: Grade 5. The Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 22(3), 237-95.Thompson, P. W. (1993). Quantitative reasoning, complexity, and additive structures. Educational Studies inMathematics, 25(3), 165–208.Thompson, P. W. (1994). The development of the concept of speed and its relationship to concepts of rate. In G.Harel & J. Confrey (Eds.), The development of multiplicative reasoning in the learning of mathematics(pp. 181-234). Albany, NY: SUNY Press.AcknowledgementsThis research was supported by a grant from the Spencer Foundation (#201600101). The views expressed do notnecessarily reflect official positions of the Foundation. The author would like to thank Madhavi Vishnubhotlaand Debasmita Basu for their contributions to this study.ICLS 2018 Proceedings870© ISLS