Role of Socio-Emotional Interactions on Mutual Trust andShared Mental Models in a Case Study of Programming TeamsMaedeh A. Kazemitabar, McGill University, maedeh.kazemi@mail.mcgill.caSusanne P. Lajoie, McGill University, susanne.lajoie@mcgill.caAbstract: This exploratory study examines international physics teams that competed in a twoday challenging hackathon (computer programming competition). Through case study analysisof three representative teams, we examined team interactions in terms of socio-emotionalinteractions, trust and shared mental models (SMMs). High and low performing teams wereidentified based on number of social challenges experienced by the team. Challenges and goalswere measured using a modified version of AIRE (Järvenoja, Volet, & Järvelä, 2013). Using amixed methods exploratory approach, preliminary results showed that teams whose members(a) interacted with more positive social-emotional interactions (b) reported more team-orientedgoals, and (c) had prior familiarity with each other, reached higher levels of mutual trust andshared mental models. Specifically, findings highlight the role of socio-emotional interactionsin enhancing mutual trust and shared mental models, and have implications for teams composedof learners with heterogeneous expertise in CSCL environments.Objectives and significancePhysics teams were examined in the context of a challenging computer-supported hackathon. A hackathon isdefined as a programming competition where several programming teams compete to program an innovative idea(i.e., a physics phenomenon in this study) within a specific timeline. Although emerging rapidly into theeducational domain, such a CSCL context is less studied both empirically and theoretically. In the context of thisstudy, teams were examined to see types of challenges they faced during their interactions, and whether positivesocio-emotional interactions helped them overcome the challenges, build mutual trust and regain strong bonds ofshared mental models between members.Theoretical frameworkCollaborative team-based learning situations are powerful learning experiences, but may face potential challenges,such as different levels of expertise, engagement and commitment (Järvenoja et al., 2013), especially if they arefrom heterogeneous backgrounds. Previous literature has shown that such challenges can hamper (a) mutual trust,and (b) shared mental models (SMMs) between team members, two mechanisms that are significant for teameffectiveness (Salas, Burke & Sims, 2005). Mutual trust is defined as the “shared belief that team members willperform their tasks and protect the interests of other team members” (Salas et al., 2005, p. 561), and SMMs referto “knowledge structures held commonly by members of a team that enable them to form accurate explanationsand expectations for the task, and in turn coordinate their actions and adapt their behavior to the demands of thetask and other team members” (Cannon-Bowers et al., 1993, p. 228).Dealing with the possible challenges that emerge in team tasks requires applying effective interpersonalskills. Previous research has found co-regulation, metacognition and socio-emotional interactions as factors ofeffective collaboration (Lajoie et al., 2015). For the purpose of this paper we examine socio-emotional interactionsexperienced in teams with the goal of identifying whether positive interactions lead to fewer challenges, moretrust and higher SMM bonds in this complex, competitive, and time-limited social learning context (i.e.,hackathon). Our premise is that positive socio-emotional interactions can mitigate challenging team moments andhelp maintain high levels of SMMs and mutual trust between team members. Furthermore, teams who possessindividuals with more team-oriented goals than individual-based goals create a stronger team atmosphere andwork collaboratively with a higher sense of unity. Thus, based on these factors we hypothesize that teams withmore positive socio-emotional strategies and team-oriented goals will have less team challenges (or deal withchallenges more effectively), high levels of mutual trust and stronger SMMs between team members, henceleading to enhanced team effectiveness.MethodsParticipantsCSCL 2017 Proceedings688© ISLS17 international teams of 2, 3, 4, or 5 participants (N= 48 students; Average age= 22 years; 73% male) invitedfrom around the globe participated in a two-day Physics Programming competition held in a North AmericanUniversity. Students ranged in expertise from Software Engineering to Math and Physics, and teams werecomposed of members with varied levels of programming expertise. Teams were formed based on students’individual interests and were then asked to collaboratively build a novel computer program that could demonstratea physics phenomenon of their choice artistically. Teams were audio and video recorded at different time pointsduring the competition (i.e., beginning, midpoint, and before submitting their projects). Individuals were asked toreport general demographic information and fill in several questionnaires based on the AIRE instrument(Järvenoja, Volet, & Järvelä, 2013), an instrument designed to capture the nature of socio-emotional regulationprocesses that students employ during collaborative learning. AIRE was used to capture students’ goals forparticipating in the hackathon (administered at beginning of competition), as well as the challenges they reported(administered at the end of the competition). Teams were judged and ranked by a group of expert judges at theend of the competition, and winners were awarded valuable prizes.DesignA case study analysis of three representative teams was conducted using a mixed methods approach to analyzefactors of team effectiveness during the physics competition. These teams represented teams who: (a) ranked high(in terms of team productivity), reported low levels of challenges (representative team labelled Team A), (b)ranked high, reported high levels of challenges (representative team labelled Team A), and, (c) ranked low,reported high level of challenges (representative team labelled Team C). Each of these teams were composed ofthree multicultural international members.Data analysisAudio and video data were transcribed verbatim. Two raters segmented, and coded the transcriptions based onsocio-emotional interaction codes (derived from Garrisson, Andeson & Archer, 2001) including affective,intearctive and cohesive social presence (see Table 1 for some examples) to identify levels of socio-emotionalinteraction competency in students‘ teamwork. Pearson’s percentage of agreement was calculated as 74%. Apartfrom demographic data, answers to the goal questionanire derived from the AIRE instrument, Trust questionnaire(Costa & Anderson, 2011) and SMMs questionnaire (Johnson et al., 2007) were also analyzed quantitatively.Table 1: Examples of socio-emotional codes (refer to Lajoie et al., 2015 for the complete codebook)ValencePositiveSocioEmotionalInteractions[P]Social Presence1. AffectiveSocialPresence2.InteractiveSocialPresence3.CohesiveSocialPresenceNegativeSocioEmotionalInteractions[N]Internal1.2. Mutual Respect1.3. Interpersonalsensitivity2.1. Continuing a thread2.2. Expressingappreciation, encouragingcontributions3.1. Using inclusivepronouns3.2. Phatic, Salutations1. Negative criticism2. Discouraging others'participation3. Passive listeningExternalCSCL 2017 ProceedingsSubcategories1.1. Use of humor4. Task difficulty(technological issues)689DescriptionsExplaining in funny sentences to providelaughterShowing respect or polite disagreementShowing caring and understandingAdding to someone else's discussionAttempting to encourage the sustainedinvolvement and contributions of othergroup members.Addressing or referring to the groupusing plural pronouns; e.g. we, our, us.Greetings / general utterances in socialinteractionsUndermining a group members’ task bynegatively criticizing their workNot assigning tasks to someone, ignoringone’s participationNot listening actively, showingdistractive behaviors.Task difficulty posing stress on the team.© ISLSResultsAlthough teams were ranked on their programming outcomes rather than their collaboration skills, we foundeffective collaboration was associated with fewer team-based challenges. Thus we refer to an effective team as ateam with less team-based challenges. Based on the AIRE instrument, low number of challenges were encounteredin Team A but high frequency of challenges in team B and C. Table 2 demonstrates team differences in terms ofchallenges encountered.Table 2: Heat map of challenges reported by students in each team (derived from the AIRE instrument). Darkercells indicate more occurrences of challengesThe transcripts and AIRE data indicate differences in effective collaboration. Team A and B showedhigh positive and low negative socio-emotional interactions, whereas Team C showed low positive and highnegative socio-emotional interactions. An analysis of the AIRE goal statements demonstrated that team-orientedgoals were more prevalent for team A and B than C. Excerpts of socio-emotional interactions, and examples ofgoals for each team are presented in Table 3. One antecedent to Team A’s productive collaboration is that theyhad past experience working together which increased the speed at which trust was established. High levels oftrust enabled them to direct their attention rapidly towards the main task from the beginning hours of thecompetition.Table 3: Excerpts indicating coded positive/negative socio-emotional interactions within team interactionsExamples ofReported goalsNot let my team down(team-based)Win first place (teambased)Not let my team down(team-based)Learn as much aspossible (individualbased)Make sure all memberscontribute equally(individual-based)Have a good time andenjoy the experience(individual-based)PriorFamiliarityTeammembersknew eachother frombeforeNo priorfamiliarityNo priorfamiliarityExcerpts demonstrating social –emotionalinteractionsBut the radius of the circle is exactly this [N3]-Oh yeah you’re right [P2], my apologies [P1], Okaynow I understand your equation [P2]-Does it work? [P2]-See when I click on it, it tells me which bracket [P2]-Yess! [P2] And if you click outside? [P2]-You are a true king! [P1]-it’s beautiful! Hahaa!! [P1][P2]- Our angular momentum is still off a bit. [P2]- It has to be to the power of 12, yeah? [P2]- Well, our eccentricity should be 0.05 [P2]- What’s that range in the bottom? [P2]- Hold on a second, I’m just going to do this [P2]- Our eccentricity, there you go! [P2]- I just solved the memory leak! [P2]-Why didn’t we do that earlier? [P2]-No, you don’t understand [N3] we have that! [P2]-Okay where do we insert it? [P2]-Oh my goodness! [N3] it’s in the description!! [N1]Girl continues to text in Facebook without involvingherself much in the project. [N4][N2]RankingTeam A(Winner)High positivesocioemotionalinteractionsTeam B(Winner)High positivesocioemotionalinteractionsTeam C(Loser)Low positivesocioemotionalinteractionsTeams A and B who demonstrated high positive socio-emotional interactions, had more strong levelsof trust and SMMs, whereas team C who had lower levels of positive socio-emotional interactions revealedweaker trust and less strong SMM bonds (refer to Tables 4 and 5 respectively).CSCL 2017 Proceedings690© ISLSTable 4: Sample items for measuring trust in team members (dark cells indicate high levels of distrust)Table 5: Sample items for SMMs between team members (dark cells indicate low levels of SMMs)Conclusions and implicationsAs guided by the literature, results of this study revealed that effective team collaboration is based on buildingpositive socio-emotional interactions and also team-oriented goals. Results also showed that prior familiarity withmembers can lead to higher trust levels. We contend that these factors should be examined simultaneously ratherthan in isolation; i.e., focusing on only one factor is not sufficient for guaranteeing high or low team effectiveness.However, the relative influence of each of the three afore-mentioned factors should be considered. Our preliminaryfindings suggest that the role of positive socio-emotional interactions was more significant than the other twofactors (team-oriented goals and prior familiarity) in determining team effectiveness. For example, winning teamB faced high challenges and had no prior familiarity with each other, but demonstrated high positive socioemotional interactions, high trust levels and strong SMM bonds. Although effective in describing the three teamsand how challenges were mitigated by positive socio-emotional interactions, these findings are not yetgeneralizable. In a larger examination of all of the teams, we aim to further explore the validity of this and examinethe relative power of positive socio-emotional interactions in determining team effectiveness. This study hasimplications for heterogeneous CSCL teams with different levels of expertise, communication methods orcommitment levels; in that such teams need to raise their awareness of the relative power of socio-emotionalinteractions, and how their interactions can significantly influence the team climate, in a positive or negativedirection. Teams can also benefit from seeing whether each member values the task at hand, so that studentmembers can work closely based on their shared goals. Furthermore, ice-breakers can be used to increasefamiliarity of members who have not worked together prior to the team event and facilitate building trust bondsbetween each other.ReferencesCannon-Bowers, J. A., Salas, E., & Converse, S. (1993). Shared mental models in expert team decision makingIn J. Castellan Jr. (Ed), Current issues in group decision making (pp. 221-246).Costa, A. C., & Anderson, N. (2011). Measuring trust in teams: Development of a multifaceted measure of teamtrust. European Journal of Organizational Psychology, 20(1), 119-154.Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (2001). Critical thinking, cognitive presence, and computerconferencing in distance education. American Journal of distance education, 15(1), 7-23.Järvenoja, H., Volet, S., & Järvelä, S. (2013). Regulation of emotions in socially challenging learning situations:An instrument to measure regulation process. Educational Psychology, 33(1), 31-58.Johnson, T. E., Lee, Y., Lee, M., O'Connor, D. L., (2007). Measuring sharedness of team-related knowledge:Design of a shared mental model instrument. Human Development, 10(4), 437-454.Lajoie, S. P., Lee, L., Poitras, E., Bassiri, M., Kazemitabar, M., Cruz-Panesso, I., & Lu, J. (2015). The role ofregulation in medical student learning in small groups Computers in Human Behavior, 52, 601-616.Salas, E., Sims, D. E., & Burke, C. S. (2005). Is there a “Big Five” in teamwork? Small group research, 36(5),555-599.CSCL 2017 Proceedings691© ISLS