Metaphors Are Projected Constraints on Action:An Ecological Dynamics View on Learning Across the DisciplinesDor Abrahamson, University of California, Berkeley, dor@berkeley.eduRaúl Sánchez–García, Universidad Europea de Madrid, raulsangar@gmail.comCliff Smyth, Saybrook University, smythcliff@gmail.comAbstract: Learning scientists have been considering the validity and relevance of argumentscoming from philosophy and cognitive science for the embodied, enactive, embedded, andextended nature of individual learning, reasoning, and practice in sociocultural ecologies.Specifically, some design-based researchers of STEM cognition and instruction have beenevaluating activities for grounding subject content knowledge in interactive sensorimotorproblem solving. In so doing, we submit, the field stands greatly to avail of theoretical modelsand pedagogical methodologies from disciplines oriented explicitly on understanding, fostering,and remediating motor action. This conceptual paper considers potential values of ecologicaldynamics, a perspective originating in kinesiology, as an explanatory resource for tacklingenduring Learning Sciences research problems. We support our position via an ecologicaldynamics reexamination of the function of metaphor in the instruction of sports skills, somaticawareness, and mathematics. We propose a view of metaphors as productive constraintsreconfiguring the dynamic system of learner, teacher, and environment.Keywords: ecological dynamics, martial arts, metaphor, mathematics, music, somatic practiceObjectives: Bringing the body sciences into embodiment theoryThe Learning Sciences are abuzz with federally funded research projects, special journal issues, symposia,workshops, and graduate-level reading courses all evaluating the putative embodied, enactive, embedded, andextended nature of individual cognition, learning, reasoning, and practice in sociocultural ecologies (Abrahamson& Eisenberg, 2012; Chandler & Tricot, 2015; Nathan, Alibali, Nemirovsky, Walkington, & Hall, 2015; Overton,2012; Wilson & Golonka, 2013). This so-called “E-turn” in the Learning Sciences (embodied, enactive,embedded, extended,…) has been contributing original critiques of long-held theoretical models and pedagogicalassumptions underlying much educational scholarship and practice (de Freitas & Sinclair, 2014; Roth, 2015;Spackman & Yanchar, 2013). In turn, the E-turn is stimulating the design of new technological platforms (Lee,2015), instructional activities (Lindgren & Johnson–Glenberg, 2013), and research methodologies (Worsley &Blikstein, 2014), including the use of multimodal data gathering and analytics for investigating the impact ofmultimodal tasks (Abrahamson, Shayan, Bakker, & van der Schaaf, in press).By and large, these E-turn efforts have so far drawn and oriented on classical intellectual spheres, familiareducational spaces, and canonical domains of knowledge, skill, and intervention. Namely, most educationalresearchers who have been inspired by the E-turn are looking to the cognitive sciences, writ large, so as better tounderstand the potential role that overt or covert sensorimotor activity may play in the teaching and learning oflanguage arts and STEM content (Enyedy, Danish, Delacruz, & Kumar, 2012; Glenberg, Willford, Gibson,Goldberg, & Zhu, 2012; Landy, Brookes, & Smout, 2014). We submit that the E-turn could bear an even greaterimpact on the Learning Sciences if the field considered additional intellectual disciplines and cultural practices.In particular, we argue that educational researchers who are designing and evaluating instructional activitiescentered on students’ motor actions should avail from engaging with empirically based robust theoretical modelsfrom disciplines that evolved explicitly so as to investigate and serve the development, practice, and remediationof human motor action. By thus looking further afield, we argue, the field of the Learning Sciences stands to availof theoretical frameworks that hitherto have played at best minimal roles in educational research yet are optimallypoised to inform E-turn research. As a case in point, this exploratory conceptual paper will consider the potentialvalue of ecological dynamics, a theoretical model originating in kinesiology and sports science, as an explanatoryresource for tackling an enduring pan-domain LS research problem, the problem of how metaphors work inteaching and learning.Metaphor appears to serve as an appropriate construct for investigating new horizons and resources forE-turn research. On the one hand, the analytic treatment of metaphor has for the main looked to traditionalcognitive-science Cartesian epistemology (Ortony, 1993), namely the historical assumption that cognitive activityis inherent in propositional symbol processing located in a brain that is functionally isolated from its sensory inputand action output. Even the cognitive-semantics theories of conceptual metaphor (e.g., Lakoff & Núñez, 2000)ICLS 2016 Proceedings314© ISLSand conceptual blending (Fauconnier & Turner, 2002), which look to embodied situatedness as the roots ofcomplex reasoning, have been critiqued as unfit to explain evidence of simple human interaction, learning, anddevelopment (Gibbs, 2011, 2014). That is, whereas conceptual metaphor/blending theory offers models forontogeny and praxis that are compelling in their descriptive and diagrammatic clarity, these descriptions are notcapturing the empirical reality of mundane immersive being, such as a student dyad working together on aninstructional task. On the other hand, the imagistic, situated, and often multimodal and dynamical semanticfeatures of metaphor apparently lend this linguistic phenomenon to alternative treatments grounded in non-dualist,post-cognitivist, anti-representationist epistemologies (Chemero, 2009; Hutto, Kirchhoff, & Abrahamson, 2015).As such, a focus on metaphor may enable us to judge what the body sciences, and in particular the theory ofecological dynamics, might add to mainstream perspectives in the Learning Science.We are thus arguing for the application of theoretical frameworks from the motor-action sciences to theanalysis of educational interactions, and we have selected metaphor as a phenomenal context for building thisconceptual argument. We pursue this argument by way of examining the potential of ecological dynamics toilluminate the function of metaphors in three domains of instruction: sports skills, somatic awareness, andmathematics. We contend that ecological-dynamics treatments of instructional metaphor shed new light on itsmechanism, function, and effect on learning. In particular, we will propose a view of metaphor as a type ofproductive constraint projected into the environment. Instructors communicate metaphors verbally—often orallyand gesturally, in close, real-time responsive coaching interaction—with the purpose of steering students tomodify their engagement in a problem space. Making sense of verbal content is necessarily a tacit sensorimotorprocess of generating covert spatial–dynamical imagistic structures (Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002). Thesephenomenological entities are either anchored in actual environmental features or constitute new gestaltssuperimposed onto the environment (“projections,” Kirsh, 2013). From the ecological-dynamics view, we theorizethese induced structures as productively constraining students’ process of solving a motor-action problem ofpractice. Given these new constraints, students must readapt to the changed environment so as to continue seekingto satisfy their assigned objective. They do so by developing new goal-oriented motor-action coordinations bettersuited to the modified circumstances. These coordinations are precisely the instructor’s target learning outcomefor the activity. In domains of conceptual learning, such as mathematics, these new coordinations are thenencapsulated via reflection, semiosis, and discourse to take form as the target content.Theoretical frameworkInstructional metaphors—limitations of current theoryWhen a violin teacher asks a student to play a musical phrase as though she is throwing a ball into a basket, howdoesthatinstructionalinterventionresultinamodificationinherplaying(seehttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=st4-CcO4XwM, focusing on 01:53 – 03:14; see Figure 1)?Figure 1. Emerging artist Mártha Déak (on left) in masterclass with Maestro Maxim Vengerov (on right),working on Mozart’s Concerto No. 3 in G Major K216. Vengerov suggests Déak play the very first two notes ofthe violin part as though she is throwing a basketball into the basket—”tee-yum… tum!”Common theoretical models treating the curious phenomenon of metaphor will have us believe that thestudent internally builds structural alignments between source and target domains—between the imagined actionsof throwing a basketball and the imagined actions and audiated effects of generating a musical phrase—and thenICLS 2016 Proceedings315© ISLSexternally performs the intact conceptual blend of these imagined actions (Fauconnier & Turner, 2002; Lakoff &Johnson, 1980; Miller & Williams, 2010). We view these explanations as problematic, because they: (a) rely ona cognitivist perspective that assumes a mind–body duality comprising internal representations in the head thatare implemented externally via the body into the environment—a view that jars with philosophical arguments(Phenomenology, Merleau–Ponty, 2005/1945; Enactivism, Varela, Thompson, & Rosch, 1991) cognitivedevelopmental psychology theory (genetic epistemology, Piaget, 1968), and cognitive-psychology empiricism(Hauk et al., 2004); (b) ignore the dynamical, interactive, developmental, and sociocultural facets of humanexperiences (Becvar et al., 2010; Malafouris, 2013); and (c) are not conducive to empirical evaluation (Gibbs,2011, 2014). What might an E-turn model of instructional metaphors look like?Ecological dynamicsResearch on embodiment has recently been discussed in the sports sciences from a Radical Enactive Cognitionperspective (Hutto & Sánchez–García, 2015) building upon the research program of ecological dynamics. Theecological-dynamics research program (Vilar, Araújo, Davids, & Renshaw, 2012) blends dynamic systems theory(Thelen & Smith, 1994) and ecological psychology (Gibson, 1966) enabling sports scientists to explain thelearning of physical activities as the self-organizing of subject–environment dynamical complex systems. Theecological-dynamics perspective conceptualizes human learning not as hermetic process in an individual’s headbut rather as an entire system tending toward new task-satisfying dynamical equilibrium among the individual(the student) and the environment, where the environment may include natural and artifactual materials that mayextend the student’s reach. The system may include also fellow students, who may engage in the collaborative coenactment of the new practice, and a coach, whose role is modeled as follows.Whereas human agents engaged in goal-oriented activity constitute a self-organizing dynamical system,still their behavior can be affected or “channeled” by introducing various types of constraints (Araújo & Davids,2004, p. 50). It may be useful to iterate that the term ‘constraint,’ which is used colloquially to negatively valuean undesirable impediment to action, here signifies a positively valued discovery or intervention that blocks outthe myriad ineffective engagement options and thus steers the novice closer toward the possibility of engagingeffectively. Notwithstanding, though, and regardless of the source or type of constraint, it is ultimately the noviceswho, within the envelope of constraints, must develop situated sensorimotor schemes appropriate to achieving thetask objective under shifting circumstances. A constraint-led model frames the non-linear pedagogical approachto sports, based on introducing and modifying constraints in the learning environment (Davids, Button, & Bennet,2008; Renshaw, Chow, Davids, & Hammond, 2010). Non-linear pedagogy offers coaches and athletes a viablealternative to direct instruction. Individual athletes are explicitly encouraged each to discover their own motoraction coordination solution through goal-oriented physical activity within an appropriately constrained learningenvironment. Empirical evaluation of constraints-led, discovery-based learning has demonstrated its effectivenessand advantages (e.g., in skiing, Vereijken & Whiting, 1990).To the extent that constraints are instrumental to the phenomenon of learning, they become important inresearch on learning. For researchers attempting to model learning as the emergence of agents’ adaptive behaviorsit has been useful to identify, articulate, and classify these various constraints. The leading kinesiologist Newell(1986, p. 404) identified three sources of constraints on the learning process: organism (biochemical,biomechanical, neurological, and morphological levels), environment (e.g., gravity, temperature), and task (goalsand rules). Of these three sources of constraints, our interdisciplinary study focuses on the environmental, whichin turn includes the subcategory of augmented information—a real-time instructional intervention, such as ateacher’s responsive suggestions on how the student should modify her performance (Newell, 1996, pp. 422-423).From the ecological-dynamics perspective, the teacher’s proactive, formative evaluation of students’ suboptimalperformance is thus conceptualized as introducing a productive constraint.Augmented information comes in a variety of modalities, including speech, gesture, and/or visualmaterials, but also direct physical contact. To the best of our knowledge, scholars of constraint-based pedagogyhave not looked at augmented information communicated via metaphor or simile. We propose a theoreticalcontribution centered on clarifying the systemic function of augmented information delivered via metaphor orimagistic instruction. To emphasize, from an ecological-dynamics perspective we view the potential effect ofinstructional metaphor as productively constraining the learner’s solving of a motor-coordination problem.Instructional use of metaphors, analogies, and similes has been documented in various sports branches(Masters, 2000; Lam, Maxwell & Masters, 2009). Yet it extends to other overtly embodied physical practices,such as dance (Bernard et al., 2006; Böger, 2012; Franklin, 1996; Kolter et al., 2010). For example, a variety ofmetaphors are used in a somatic practice called the Feldenkrais Method (Buchanan & Ulrich, 2001; Feldenkrais,1972). Yet metaphor is prevalent also in the covertly embodied conceptual disciplines, such as mathematics(Abrahamson, Gutiérrez, & Baddorf, 2012; Núñez, Edwards, & Matos, 1999; Presmeg, 2006; Sfard, 1994).ICLS 2016 Proceedings316© ISLSModes of inquiry: Comparing cross-domain paradigmatic casesWe three authors are bringing to bear theoretical constructs from our respective domains of investigation—mathematics, sports, and movement-based awareness (‘somatic’) practice. Acknowledging the obvious surfacedifferences of these domains, our collaborative rationale here is to transcend these differences so as to articulateand refine a model at a semantic level that is general enough to illuminate phenomena in the three domains butnot so general that it loses practical traction in any domain. Not an empirical study, this conceptual essay is moreso a collective thought experiment examining the utility of the body sciences for the learning sciences.Evidence: Ecological-dynamics analyses of instructional metaphors acrossthree domainsWe now present relevant case studies on the use of metaphors within didactical practices from our respectivedomains of investigation: martial arts (judo), mathematics (algebra), and somatic practice (Feldenkrais Method).Case 1: JudoHarai Goshi (“sweeping hip-throw”) is a widely known and often used judo coordination pattern for overcomingan aggressor. A superficial view of Harai Goshi might focus primarily on the leg action that “sweeps” the opponentoff the ground. A systemic perspective, however, describes the coordination pattern as a “balance scale falling outof balance” (Sánchez–García & González, 2014). This metaphorical visualization of a Harai Goshi performancemay not be available to a novice onlooker, and yet it is instrumental to successful replication of the coordinationpattern. Therefore, instructors attempt to foster this visualization via coaching intervention.Figure 2 shows a male judoka performing Harai Goshi. The judoka is leaning his torso forward so as tocounter-lever the other end of the embodied beam that sweeps up the opponent toward horizontal orientation, atwhich point he will rotate and fling the opponent over and onto the ground. As such, a judo sensei is likely to offera judoka who is practicing Harai Goshi the metaphorical transition information, “Add weight to tip the balancebeam out of balance” (Sánchez–García & González, 2014). If he accepts this augmented information, the judokaprojects it onto his systemic field of action, which includes the opponent, as a new environmental constraint thathe must comply with in order to complete the task of overthrowing the opponent. Initially, this new metaphoricalimage may disequilibrate and unpack the judoka’s (ineffective) motor action coordination. With practice, though,he may figure out a new coordination that engages this image as an affordance for solving the problem. Reachingexpertise, the judoka need no longer invoke the image, because the coordination becomes for him second nature.Unless he coaches others with the same image, he might forget it completely.Figure 2. Instructional use of the “balance beam scale” metaphor in judo (sport)Case 2: MathematicsThe mathematical subject matter of algebra presents many difficulties to students, including the notion of avariable as well as its symbolic notation in alphabetical characters (e.g., x, Kieran, 2007). A common curricularsequencing from arithmetic to algebra inflicts further cognitive entailments (Herscovics & Linchevski, 1996). Inparticular, novices to algebra are required to replace an operational conceptualization of the equal sign, as in “3+ 6 = ___ [solve!]”, where the “=” denotes an imperative to perform arithmetic operations on the left wing of theequation and write the result on the right, with a relational conceptualization, as in “3x + 6 = 4x+ 2”, where neitherof the two equivalent expressions on either side of the “=” is temporally antecedent to the other, the entireproposition does not bear any particular directionality, and it is not initially clear what operations should be carriedout (Jones, Inglis, Gilmore, & Evans, 2013).ICLS 2016 Proceedings317© ISLSFigure 3. Instructional use of the “balance beam scale” metaphor in algebra (mathematics) juxtaposed with afragment from da Vinci’s Vitruvian Man as illustration for the intended embodiment of balance images.From the ecological-dynamics perspective, the phenomenon of metaphorical visualization andengagement is conceptualized as a system composed of an organism (the algebra novice), a task (“solving for x,”i.e. the task of determining the numerical value of the variable), and an environment (the manifold ecology inwhich the organism is to complete the task). Algebra novices are viewed as impeded by contextually inappropriateenvironmental constraints that they themselves are projecting into the field of action, namely the operationalvisualization. That is, students’ robust arithmetic coordination patterns pre-constrain them to engage andmanipulate features of the visual display in ways that block their access to a critical task-relevant affordance ofthe algebraic equation. The instructor who discerns behavioral evidence of the student applying these less effectiveconstraints intervenes by offering alternative environmental constraints, and specifically by augmenting thealgebraic proposition with the balance-beam structural dynamics (see Figure 3).In passing we wish to stress from an enactivist perspective (Varela, Thompson, & Rosch, 1991) that“visualization,” a term oft used in mathematics-educational research, tacitly enfolds action in addition toperception: To visualize is necessarily to see-for-acting, even if the perception never results in overt manipulation(Abrahamson, Lee, Negrete, & Gutiérrez, 2014); even when the symbols are inscribed on paper and thereforecannot be manipulated literally but only virtually (Landy, Brookes, & Smout, 2014).Case 3: Feldenkrais MethodA common problem in human movement is how to enhance the efficient, comfortable, and safe use of the spine.This is not just a question of anatomy and physiology alone, as human movement is learned from infancy in thecontext of the community’s “form of life” for the individual (e.g., task demands, socio-cultural practices, thematerial–cultural environment; Rietveld & Kiverstein, 2014, p. 327). The most efficient movement of the spineinvolves the distribution of force and movement through the spine according to its overall shape, the structure ofthe vertebrae, and their relationships.Figure 4. ‘Spine like a chain’ (illustration picture with superimposed image of a chain).The overall pedagogical strategy here may be viewed via ecological-dynamics as including organism(the Feldenkrais student), environment (mat, clinic), and task (lifting the pelvis with the legs in a comfortable,efficient, and effective way). Feldenkrais pedagogy directs the learners’ attention to environmental constraints(gravity, surfaces, space), the changing relationships of/in the learner’s body, and felt qualities of action (effort,smoothness, reversibility). This “education of attention” (Gibson, 1966, p. 52) creates a ‘felt difference,’ whichthe student can utilize to produce more effective patterns of action (Ginsburg & Schuette–Ginsburg, 2010).ICLS 2016 Proceedings318© ISLSFeldenkrais teachers use instructional metaphors, whether mathematical, geometrical, spatial,mechanical, or imagistic, and these are believed to induce “global process gestalts or vitality contours,” “forcedynamic gestalts,” “causal (“if-then”) imagery,” and salient “node points” (Kimmel, Irran, & Luger, 2014, p. 17;see also Smyth, 2012). In particular, a teacher may suggest the student imagine the ‘spine as a chain’ (see Figure4). The chain is a simple and well-known implement that transmits and shapes forces through the action of itslinks and articulations. It ‘maps’ well onto the structure and function of the human spine. With a student lying ontheir back, both knees bent and lifting their pelvis, the image of the ‘spine as a chain’ can be used to invite thestudent to constrain the movement of the spine (e.g., aiming to lift or lower one vertebrae, or ‘link,’ at a time). Ifthe student accepts the suggestion to utilize the image, there is a tactile and haptic ‘sensing-for-action,’ assuggested by the enactivist perspective—a new anticipatory ‘feeling-for’ changing pressure in relation to the floor.In turn, the points of pressure of the vertebrae against the floor now become salient points of information. Themovement itself may alter into a punctuated or step-like pattern, link by link, to better sense how the spinearticulates in relation to the floor. Now physical effort-force (perceived muscular effort, pressure in joints and onfeet) and spatial-movement dynamics (the height of the pelvis and parts of the spine) are modulated to implementthis metaphorical image of the spine-as-a-chain in the learner’s action. This use of augmented information maythus afford a more differentiated and efficient use of the spine as well as an ability to sense the spine in a moredifferentiated way, potentially modifying future performance of this as well as related actions.Conclusions and implications: A call to actionThis explorative paper set out to consider whether theories originating in scholarship explicitly dedicated to motordevelopment and control could contribute to educational research on teaching and learning in the disciplines (seealso Beilock, 2008). Our motivation for this exercise was an assumption that motor-action models and methodsshould be relevant to any educational research program oriented on understanding the physical–dynamical rootsof skill development, whether said skill is overtly embodied (e.g., surfing) or covertly embodied (e.g., physics).In particular, if we lay such stakes in the sensorimotor grounding of STEM concepts, it might behoove us tounderstand how sensorimotor activity is orchestrated with designed ‘fields of promoted action’ (Reed & Bril,1996). Our rationale for this exercise was to: (a) select some motor-action theory; (b) identify an action-relatedpedagogical technique as a context for exploring the utility of the theory; (c) find appropriate paradigmaticphenomena from across the overtly and covertly embodied practices so as to test the robustness of this utility; and(d) evaluate for functional parity revealed across the practices via applying the theory. We chose the theory ofecological dynamics (Vilar et al., 2012) and its attendant constraints-led pedagogy (Davids et al., 2008; Renshawet al., 2010), which originate in kinesiology and sports science, to examine the function of metaphor-basedinstructions across cases of martial-arts, mathematical, and somatic-rehabilitation practice. Our comparisonsuggested analogous educational process across the diverse disciplines.This essay is no more than a Gedankenexperiment—we did not provide empirical data to support ourclaim. Nevertheless, we hope to have stoked a conversation on the potential of movement sciences to informeducational research. In particular, juxtaposing cases from covert and overt movement learning may sensitizeeducational researchers interested in STEM domains to invisible processes at play. Future empirical work mayinvestigate the semiotic–somatic–semiotic processes putatively at play as students receive lexical information,enact it sensomotorically, and then reflect on this experience and document it using symbolic notation.The hypothesis that instructional metaphors operate as productive constraints that learners project untotheir task engagement could bear far-reaching implications for educational theory and practice. In particular, aproposal that learning across the disciplines is mobilized by projected imagery leads to an intriguing speculation:Some aspects of human reasoning in general could be modeled as the tentative projection of imagistic constraintson embodied cognitive actions. The very fundamental psychological construct of a frame could be recast from adynamical-systems view as a constraint projected into a field of action. If learning is moving in new ways, soshould the science of learning (Abrahamson & Sánchez–García, in press).ReferencesAbrahamson, D. (Chair & Organizer) & M. Eisenberg (Discussant) (2012). You’re it! Body, action, and object inSTEM learning. In J. v. Aalst, K. Thompson, M. J. Jacobson, & P. Reimann (Eds.), Proc. of the 10th Int.Conf. of the Learning Sciences: Future of Learning (Vol. 1, pp. 283-290). Sydney: ISLS.Abrahamson, D., Gutiérrez, J. F., & Baddorf, A. K. (2012). Try to see it my way: The discursive function ofidiosyncratic mathematical metaphor. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 14(1), 55-80.Abrahamson, D., Lee, R. G., Negrete, A. G., & Gutiérrez, J. F. (2014). Coordinating visualizations of polysemousaction: Values added for grounding proportion. ZDM Math. Education, 46(1), 79-93.ICLS 2016 Proceedings319© ISLSAbrahamson, D., & Sánchez-García, R. (in press). Learning is moving in new ways: The ecological dynamics ofmathematics education. Journal of the Learning Sciences.Abrahamson, D., Shayan, S., Bakker, A., & Van der Schaaf, M. F. (in press). Eye-tracking Piaget: Capturing theemergence of attentional anchors in the coordination of proportional motor action. Human Development.Araújo, D., & Davids, K. (2004). Embodied cognition and emergent decision-making in dynamical movementsystems. Junctures: The Journal for Thematic Dialogue, 2, 45-57.Becvar Weddle, L. A., & Hollan, J. D. (2010). Scaffolding embodied practices in professional education. Mind,Culture & Activity, 17(2), 119-148.Beilock, S. L. (2008). Beyond the playing field: Sport psychology meets embodied cognition. InternationalReview of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 1(1), 19-30.Bernard, A., Steinmüller, W., & Stricker, U. (2006). Ideokinesis: A creative approach to human movement andbody alignment. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books.Böger, C. (2012). Metaphorical instruction and body memory. In S. Koch, T. Fuchs, M. Summa & C. Müller(Eds.), Body memory, metaphor and movement (pp. 187-199). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.Buchanan, P. A., & Ulrich, B. D. (2001). The Feldenkrais Method: A dynamic approach to changing motorbehavior. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 72(4), 315-323.Chandler, P. & Tricot, A. (Eds.) (2015). Human movement, physical and mental health, and learning [Specialissue]. Educational Psychology Review, 27(3).Chemero, A. (2009). Radical embodied cognitive science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Davids, K., Button, C., & Bennet, S. (2008). Dynamics of skill acquisition: A constraints-led approach.Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.Enyedy, N., Danish, J. A., Delacruz, G., & Kumar, M. (2012). Learning physics through play in an augmentedreality environment. Int. Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 7(3), 347-378.de Freitas, E., & Sinclair, N. (2014). Mathematics and the body: Material entanglements in the classroom. NewYork: Cambridge University Press.Fauconnier, G., & Turner, M. (2002). The way we think: Conceptual blending and the mind’s hidden complexities.New York: Basic Books.Feldenkrais, M. (1972). Awareness through movement. San Francisco, CA: Harper San Francisco.Franklin, E. (1996). Dance imagery for technique and performance. Champaign: Human Kinetics.Gibbs, R. W. (2011). Evaluating Conceptual Metaphor theory. Discourse Processes, 48(8), 529-562.Gibbs, R. W. (2014). Why do some people dislike conceptual metaphor theory? Journal of Cognitive Semiotics,5(1-2), 14-36.Gibson, J. J. (1966). The senses considered as perceptual systems. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.Ginsburg, C., & Schuette–Ginsburg, L. (2010). The intelligence of moving bodies: A somatic view of life and itsconsequences. Santa Fe, NM: AWAREing Press.Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(3),558-565.Glenberg, A., M., Willford, J., Gibson, B., Goldberg, A., & Zhu, X. (2012). Improving reading to improve math.Scientific Studies of Reading, 16(4), 316-340.Hanna, T. (1986). What is somatics? SOMATICS: Magazine-Journal of the Bodily Arts and Sciences, 5(4).Retrieved from http://somatics.org/library/htl-wis1Hauk, O., Johnsrude, I., & Pulvermüller, F. (2004). Somatotopic representation of action words in human motorand premotor cortex. Neuron, 41(2), 301-307.Hutto, D. D., Kirchhoff, M. D., & Abrahamson, D. (2015). The enactive roots of STEM: Rethinking educationaldesign in mathematics. Educational Psychology Review, 27(3), 371-389.Herscovics, N., & Linchevski, L. (1996). Crossing the cognitive gap between arithmetic and algebra. EducationalStudies in Mathematics, 30(2), 39-65.Hutto, D. D., & Sánchez-García, R. (2014). Choking RECtified: embodied expertise beyond Dreyfus.Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 14(2), 309-331.Jones, I., Inglis, M., Gilmore, C., & Evans, R. (2013). Teaching the substitutive conception of the equals sign.Research in Mathematics Education, 15(1), 34-49.Kieran, C. (2007). Learning and teaching algebra at the middle school through college levels: Building meaningfor symbols and their manipulation. In F. K. Lester (Ed.), Second handbook of research on mathematicsteaching and learning (pp. 707-762). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.Kimmel, M., Irran, C., & Luger, M. A. (2014). Bodywork as systemic and inter-enactive competence:Participatory process management in Feldenkrais Method and Zen Shiatsu. Frontiers in Psychology, 5.Kirsh, D. (2013). Embodied cognition and the magical future of interaction design. ACM Transactions on Human–ICLS 2016 Proceedings320© ISLSComputer Interaction, 20(1), 3:1-30.Lam, W. K., Maxwell, J. P., & Masters, R. (2009). Analogy learning and the performance of motor skills underpressure. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 31(3), 337-357.Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. L. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.Lakoff, G., & Núñez, R. E. (2000). Where mathematics comes from. New York: Basic Books.Landy, D., Brookes, D., & Smout, R. (2014). Abstract numeric relations and the visual structure of algebra.Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 40(5), 1404-1418.Lee, V. R. (Ed.) (2015). Learning technologies and the body: Integration and implementation. NYC: Routledge.Lindgren, R., & Johnson-Glenberg, M. (2013). Emboldened by embodiment: Six precepts for research onembodied learning and mixed reality. Educational Researcher, 42(8), 445-452.Masters, R. S. W. (2000). Theoretical aspects of implicit learning in sport. Int. J. of Sport Psych., 31, 530-541.Merleau-Ponty, M. (1945/2005). Phenomenology of perception (C. Smith, Trans.). New York: Routledge.Miller, N. C., & Williams, R. F. (2010, September). Building a better oarsman: Conceptual integration and motorlearning in rowing instruction. Paper presented at the 10th conference on Conceptual Structure,Discourse, and Language, University of California, San Diego, Sept 16-19, 2010.Nathan, M. J., Alibali, M. W., Nemirovsky, R., Walkington, C., & Hall, R. (2015). Embodied mathematicalimagination and cognition (EMIC). In T. G. Bartell, K. N. Bieda, R. T. Putnam, K. Bradfield, & H.Dominguez (Eds.), Proc. of the 37th annual meeting of the N.-American Chapter of the Int. Group for thePsych of Math. Ed. (PME-NA) (Vol. 13, pp. 1352-1359). East Lansing, MI: Michigan State U.Newell, K. M. (1986). Constraints on the development of coordination. In M. G. Wade & H. T. A. Whiting (Eds.),Motor development in children: Aspects of coordination and control (pp. 341-361). Amsterdam:Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.Newell, K. M. (1996). Change in movement and skill: Learning, retention, and transfer. In M. L. Latash & M. T.Turvey (Eds.), Dexterity and its development (pp. 393-429). Mahwah, NJ: LEA.Núñez, R. E., Edwards, L. D., & Matos, J. F. (1999). Embodied cognition as grounding for situatedness andcontext in mathematics education. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 39(1), 45-65.Piaget, J. (1968). Genetic epistemology (E. Duckworth, Trans.). New York: Columbia University Press.Presmeg, N. C. (2006). Research on visualization in learning and teaching mathematics: Emergence frompsychology. In A. Gutiérrez & P. Boero (Eds.), Handbook of research on the psychology of mathematicseducation: Past, present, and future (pp. 205-235). Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.Ortony, A. (Ed.) (1993). Metaphor and thought (2nd ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Reed, E. S., & Bril, B. (1996). The primacy of action in development. In M. L. Latash & M. T. Turvey (Eds.),Dexterity and its development (pp. 431-451). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Overton, W. F. (2012, May). Relationism and relational developmental systems: A paradigm for the emergent,epigenetic, embodied, enacted, extended, embedded, encultured, mind. Paper presented at “RethinkingCognitive Development,” the 42nd annual meeting of the Jean Piaget Society, Vancouver.Renshaw, I., Chow, J. Y., Davids, K., & Hammond, J. (2010). A constraints-led perspective to understanding skillacquisition and game play. Physical Education & Sport Pedagogy, 15(2), 117-137.Rietveld, E., & Kiverstein, J. (2014). A rich landscape of affordances. Ecological Psychology, 26(4), 325-352.Roth, W.-M. (2015). Excess of graphical thinking. For the Learning of Mathematics, 35(1), 2-7.Sánchez-García, R., & González, A. (2014). Las cadenas hápticas como herramienta didáctica para la enseñanzade habilidades motrices (Haptic chains as didactic tool for the teaching of motor skills). Retos, 26, 138-142.Sfard, A. (1994). Reification as the birth of metaphor. For the Learning of Mathematics, 14(1), 44-55.Smyth, C. (2012). The contribution of Feldenkrais method to mind-body medicine (Master’s thesis). (UMI No.1536829). (Saybrook University Library: ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database.)Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1994). A dynamic systems approach to the development of cognition and action.Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied mind. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press.Vereijken, B., & Whiting, H. T. (1990). In defence of discovery learning. Canadian J. of Sport Sci., 15(2), 99-106.Vilar, L., Araújo, D., Davids, K., & Renshaw, I. (2012). The need for ‘representative task design’ in evaluatingefficacy of skills tests in sport. Journal of Sports Sciences, 30(16), 1727-1730.Wilson, A. D., & Golonka, S. (2013). Embodied cognition is not what you think it is. Frontiers in Psychology,4(58), 1-13.Worsley, M., & Blikstein, P. (2014). Using multimodal learning analytics to study learning mechanisms. In J.Stamper, Z. Pardos, M. Mavrikis, & B. M. McLaren (Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th InternationalConference on Educational Data Mining (pp. 431-432). London, UK: Institute of Education.ICLS 2016 Proceedings321© ISLS