“I Have an Opinion About Science I Think Part Is True and Part IsNot” Emergent Bilingual/Multilingual Adolescents ‘Figuring’Science Learning Through Virtual LabsShakhnoza Kayumova, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, skaumova@umassd.eduSuzanne Cardello, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, scardello@umassd.eduAbstract: Based on a year-long ethnographic research in two eighth-grade scienceclassrooms, with 25 Latinx emergent bilinguals, the study examines theaffordances/limitations of virtual labs as mediators of science learning. Employingsociocultural theories and ontological views of learning, we explore students’ learning ofscience with virtual labs and their evolving epistemic, conceptual, and identity trajectorieswith disciplinary knowledge and practices as enacted in formal-learning settings.IntroductionDrawing on a year-long ethnographic study in two eighth-grade science classrooms with 25 Latinx emergentbilingual students (otherwise identified as English Learners (ELs) by school districts), we examine the ways inwhich efforts to incorporate digital technologies (e.g., software and hardware) into the domain of scienceeducation affords and/or limits various possibilities for science meaning-making for diverse learners.Conceptual frameworkWe employ sociocultural theories and ontological views of learning (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Nasir & Hand,2006; Wortham, 2006) to explore how availability of digital technologies might influence the context forlearning science in formal-learning settings, potentially impacting students’ evolving epistemic, conceptual, andidentity trajectories with disciplinary knowledge and practices enacted and “figured” in traditional scienceclassrooms. Specifically, we draw upon Holland et al.’s (1998) notion of “figured worlds” as frames of meaningconstituted in cultural activities of formal-learning settings, into which learners enter with their personal, social,and epistemic histories. To this end, we examine the emergence of students’ science figured worlds,heterogeneous and (often) tacit epistemologies learners draw upon (Sandoval, 2005), as they conceptually andperformatively construct new meanings, understandings, and identity trajectories (subjectivities) in the contextof technology- mediated science learning.Methods: Data collection and analysisData collection was based on ethnographic methods such as participant observations, field notes, structured andsemi-structured interviews, personal and group dialogues with students, audio-recordings of classroom events,extensive artifact and document collections in two eighth-grade science classrooms during one academic year.In the first phase, the classroom data, i.e., observations, field-notes, audio and images related to students’engagement with digital technology, specifically “virtual labs,” was analyzed inductively, using bothcategorizing and connecting approaches (Maxwell & Miller, 2008). To check our biases and presumptions asresearchers, during the ensuing phase, we invited focal groups of Latinx students as critical research-partners(each focus group had between 3-5 participants at a time, with total of 5 groups) to participate with us in thesecond stage of systematic data analysis (Delgado-Gaitan, 1993).FindingsWhen we presented the data to our critical research partners, Latinx students in all groups challenged some ofour initial findings/interpretations and provided us with “countering voices,” see Table 1: Technology in theFigured World of Technology-Mediated Classroom Science.Table 1: Table 1: Technology in the Figured World of Technology-Mediated Classroom ScienceStudents said…ICLS 2018 ProceedingsWe learned…1751© ISLS“On the computer, it takes 3 seconds for water to boil,in reality it takes about 10 minutes. Most of us do notbelieve most of the science, why would we believe it?Not everything that you can do or see virtually is real inlife, you know, some of it is an imagination.”(Alejandro -Group (G.) A)“Our teachers say that science is about discovery. Doinghands on labs would help a lot more because like – it’sbetter to prove in many ways. I always believed it – Idon’t think those things will really happen. Our friendsalso say that they don’t believe in science.” (Maria -G.C)“The first time that I understood [science] when she[teacher] was explaining about combustion and heat.When the car builds a lot of heat pressure the engine’seventually going to blow up. And she had a talk and Iwas automatically saying oh yes, that’s like a car. Assoon as it reaches its highest point it blows up. But no,most of the time we need to follow a URL, or aYouTube, or those virtual labs. Maybe they think theytry to make it in our times. But I bet they learned all thiswith 3D objects, cars, we can make a wooden inclinedplane and roll a toy car. I do not know teachers aregetting lazy thinking to use a technology. Just sit there.Good luck learning it. Good luck. Hopefully you’ll do itand go for it.” (Davon -G. B)While we, as educators and researchers, appreciate theaffordances of virtual labs to provide interaction withscientific phenomena which occur at unobservable spatialand temporal scales, students do not share this value.Students saw the virtual labs as not representative of socialphenomena constituted in the experienced, lived-in world,through legitimate peripheral participation in ongoingsocial and hands-on practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991).Research in science learning shows that students fromtraditionally non-dominant backgrounds hold a variety offorms of cultural, linguistic, and embodied knowledges,experiences, and resources that often might be at odds with“settled” expectations of normative science content andteaching (Bang, 2016).The students’ responses to the technology-mediatedlearning in the virtual labs puts a visible fissure in theconnection between the pedagogical assumptionsembedded in the notions of efficiency and the assumptionsrelated to student’s “technological savviness.” Davon’s“well wishing” sentiment is particularly poignant in theface of all that is at stake for his emerging science identity.In the figured world of this science classroom, students arereminding us that the social and haptic aspects of learningact as valuable mediators of holistic and “connected”science practices. Otherwise they risk creating epistemic,conceptual, and ontological dis-identification with scienceknowledge and reproducing docile bodies that will “just sitthere” and maybe have “good luck.”Discussions and conclusionIn thinking about the disconnect we uncovered between what we, educators and researchers, might think isoccurring in terms of digital technology-mediated activities/learning, and what is really going on in the “figuredworlds” of students, we are reminded that technology is a “human activity,” laden with complex values andsubjectivities. Our challenge as educators, researchers, and innovators in the learning sciences is to find theways to harness collective and heterogeneous epistemologies and ontologies into the designs and utilization ofdigital learning technologies in formal learning environments. It is important that future studies consider hownew digital learning technologies contribute to not only students’ knowledge construction, but also their diverseways of knowing and being, their long-term identity trajectories (Bell et al., 2017) in ways that equitablysupport and validate their episto-ontological developments and evolving identification with disciplinaryknowledge and practices as enacted in formal learning settings.ReferencesBang, M. (2016). A Case Study: Native Perspectives of Gardening. In Sowing Seeds in the City (pp. 247-256).Springer Netherlands.Bell, P., Van Horne, K., & Cheng, B. H. (2017). Special Issue: Designing Learning Environments for EquitableDisciplinary Identification. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 26(3): 367-375.Delgado-Gaitan, C. (1993). Researching change and changing the researcher. Harvard Educational Review,63(4), 389-412.Holland D., Lachicotte W. Jr., Skinner D., & Cain C. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds.Cambridge: Harvard University Press.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge Univ. Press.Maxwell, J., & Miller, B. (2008). Categorizing and Connecting Strategies in Qualitative Data Analysis.Handbook of Emergent Methods. 461–479. New York: Guilford Press.Nasir, N. I. S., & Hand, V. M. (2006). Exploring sociocultural perspectives on race, culture, and learning.Review of Educational Research, 76(4), 449-475.Sandoval, W. A. (2005). Understanding students’ practical epistemologies and their influence on learningthrough inquiry. Science Education, 89(4), 634-656Wortham, S. (2006). Learning identity: The joint emergence of social identification and academic learning.Cambridge University Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1752© ISLS