Knowledge Places: Embedding Knowledge in the Space of theClassroomAnthony Perritano, University of Illinois at Chicago, aperri3@uic.eduAbstract: This research investigates a novel approach to supporting classroom learningcommunities through ubiquitous computing and embodied interaction. Specifically, this workembeds community knowledge within the physical space of the classroom, with the aim ofmediating opportunistic inter-group interactions instigated through proximity.VisionIn a learning community approach to education (Bielaczyc & Collins, 1999) the whole classroom of studentsassumes “collective cognitive responsibility” (Scardamalia, 2002) for its progress, often creating a communityknowledge base consisting of user-contributed content, semantic tags, votes, and other social information. Whilesome research has investigated knowledge building environments, most designs have adopted a cloud-basedinteraction paradigm for contributing to and accessing emerging community knowledge. Cloud-based designs canbe successful in promoting learning (Slotta, 2013), however, getting young learners to attend to and leverage thecommunity’s knowledge can be challenging. There are many reasons cited for this, including lack of interest, lackof awareness of the potential value of community knowledge, difficulty in formulating queries to accessknowledge contributions, the granularity of contributions, and the dominant role of peer discourse andcollaboration in daily classroom activity, particularly for younger learners. While these scaffolds do complementstudents’ individual interactions with the cloud-based knowledge base, they leave in place a somewhat monolithiccloud as the repository of their collective work. The goal of this research is to explore the potential for movingthe knowledge base into the space of the classroom. Supporting the construction of an emergent knowledge basein which students’ physical location within the classroom and co-location with other students serves to mediatethe filtering, access to, and applications of community knowledge – through the technology paradigm ofubiquitous computing, in which physical objects, surfaces, and spaces embody digital information. This approach,“Knowledge Places” (KP), decomposes the community knowledge base into a collection of thematic(disciplinary) units which are semio-spatially mapped (Roschelle & Pea, 2002) onto demarcated locationsdistributed around the classroom. This necessitates students’ physical movement among those KP sites in orderto contribute knowledge or otherwise access their peers’ contributions through a “performant query,” analogousto the way the Embedded Phenomena designs (Moher, 2006) require movement to investigate shared objects ofinquiry. Ultimately, Knowledge Places seeks to bring learners into close contact with the aggregated communityknowledge associated with a particular topic at each KP site and to bring learners into physical proximity withpeers who share an immediate interest in a given topic for the purpose of fostering productive disciplinarydiscourse (Engle & Conant, 2002).ReferencesBielaczyc, K., & Collins, A. (1999). Learning communities in classrooms: A reconceptualization of educationalpractice. Instructional-Design Theories and Models: A New Paradigm of Instructional Theory, 2, 269–292.Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding Principles for Fostering Productive Disciplinary Engagement:Explaining an Emergent Argument in a Community of Learners Classroom. Cognition and Instruction,20(4), 399–483. http://doi.org/10.1207/s1532690xci2004_1Moher, T. (2006). Embedded phenomena: supporting science learning with classroom-sized distributedsimulations. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 691–700. http://doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124875Roschelle, J., & Pea, R. (2002). A walk on the WILD side: How wireless handhelds may change computersupported collaborative learning. International Journal of Cognition and Technology, 1(1), 145–168.http://doi.org/10.1075/ijct.1.1.09rosScardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. Liberal Educationin a Knowledge Society, 97, 67–98.Slotta, J. D. (2013). Knowledge Community and Inquiry: New Opportunities for Scripting and Orchestration.OISE-University of Toronto, 1–15.1881