A Study of Collaborative Knowledge Construction in STEM viaEducational RoboticsChrysanthos Socratous and Andri Ioannou,chrysanthos.socratous@cyprusinteractionlab.com, andri.i.ioannou@cut.ac.cyCyprus Interaction Lab, Cyprus University of TechnologyAbstract: The educational robotics learning environment can integrate the benefits of roboticstechnology, computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL) and problem-based pedagogy,in an authentic learning space, simulating real-world problems. This study investigatedprimary school students’ patterns of knowledge construction in STEM, as they engaged incollaborative problem-solving using educational robotics. Data analysis involved micro-levelexamination of students’ discourse and interactions with their peers, the teacher and the robot,and students’ delivered solutions (software programs and worksheets). The study presentsthree conditions that appear to relate to higher levels of knowledge construction: (i) embodiedinteraction with the robot; (ii) fair contribution by teammates adhering to predefined roles, and(iii) cognitive dissonance as a result of the robot’s failure to perform the expected outcome.The study contributes to the design of educational robotics learning environments andconditions for collaborative knowledge construction in the STEM field.IntroductionSince the beginning of the 21st century, there is a growing discussion about changes that should be made in theeducation systems in order to be able to meet the needs of the borderless, globalized and internationalized world.Problem-solving, critical thinking and collaboration are typically identified as key skills for success in the 21stcentury. Many reform efforts of the educational systems of advanced countries aim towards this direction.Frequently, learning in the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) domains are cited asvehicles for the development of these skills for students (Ardito, Mosley & Scollins 2014).Contemporary educational inquiry highlights the need to incorporate a technology-rich learningenvironment into the teaching of the STEM domains. The technology offers support for learning STEM-relatedschool subjects or for enacting cross-curricular learning activities. Among flourishing arrays of technologies,educational robotics could be a highly effective learning environment for teaching STEM concepts (Barker etal., 2008). Educational robotics provides the opportunity for real-world application of science concepts,technology engineering, and mathematics, and helps to remove the abstractness of these fields (Nugent et al.,2010).In this work, we present a learning experience using educational robotics, allowing students to engagein collaboration and co-construction of shared understandings in the fields of STEM. Our goal was to: a) fieldtest our design and explore patterns of collaborative knowledge construction, and b) explore the mediating roleof educational robotics in our context. Below, we first present past papers on educational robotics andcollaborative knowledge construction. Next, we present the theoretical grounding for our design and we detailthe specifics of our activities and implementation procedures in a classroom setting. We conclude the section bypresenting our findings from a field study with 14 student-participants and discussing possible links between theuse of educational robotics and the observed outcomes.Background workEducational roboticsOur review of the literature reveals that educational robotics are used in education as a tool for achieving thefollowing main objectives: a) to teach STEM, b) to develop learning skills such as problem solving,collaboration, scientific inquiry and critical thinking and c) to foster student motivation to engage in science andtechnology (Nugent et al. 2010). According to Eguchi (2010) most of the empirical work in education hasfocused on the first main objective. The majority of this work explores topics related to the field of physics andmathematics and emphasizes on skills that can be developed through robotics such as, problem solving skills,logic and scientific inquiry (Benitti, 2012). However, few studies have dealt with how knowledge is constructedand what elements of educational robotics can be associated with or can promote collaborative knowledgeconstruction.ICLS 2018 Proceedings496© ISLSMany studies of educational robotics have been conducted in the recent years. These investigationshave focused mainly on higher education; fewer studies have been conducted with secondary and elementaryschool students. Educational robotics with k-12 students have been implemented mainly out of schools, insummer or after-school programs and competitions (Barker et al., 2010). In general, there is limited empiricalevidence to prove the direct impact of educational robotics on the k-12 curriculum. Many educators, researchersand educational theorists (e.g., Papert) believe that robotics can provide an enormous source of energy that canbe used to stimulate children’s learning. Overall however, while the arguments for the benefits of educationalrobotics in the classroom continue to grow, scientific inquiry in the area is sporadic and most of the literature isdescriptive in nature. The processes and conditions under which any specific learning goals are achieved are farfrom being documented. Thus we need first to explore what educational robotics have to offer to education,before we arrive in overestimated and possibly wrong conclusions regarding their pedagogical value. Anothermain weakness in the area of educational robotics is the absence of clearly defined curriculum and educationalmaterial for teachers. Alimisis (2013) pointed out that there is no systematic introduction of robotics in schoolcurricula within the European school systems.Educational robotics and STEM-related outcomesThere are already a number of reports from robotics programs claiming that educational robotics can improvethe performance of students in STEM (Bers & Portsmore, 2005; Nagchaudhuri, Singh, Kaur & George, 2002, asstated in Bilotta et al., 2009). For example, the use of educational robotics led to the enhancement of students (a)mathematics performance (Highfield, 2010; Nugent et al., 2009) (b) science performance and physics contentknowledge (Mitnik et al., 2008) (c) engineering design skills (Larkins, Moore, Rubbo & Covington, 2013; Honget al., 2011), and (d) STEM knowledge (Barker et al., 2010; Barker & Ansorge, 2007). Other benefits from theuse of robotics include improvement in collaboration skills (Nugent et al., 2009; Mitnik et al., 2009) problemsolving skills (Nugent et al., 2009), creative thinking (Barak & Zadok, 2009), and scientific inquiry (Sullivan,2008).Educational robotics and collaborative knowledge constructionIn the last 20 years, researchers have seriously studied learning in small groups and the nature of cooperationand interaction have turned into a focal issue for research on learning in social settings. Essential tocollaborative learning is knowledge construction where the collaborative learning aims at co-constructingknowledge upon sharing information in groups for solving given tasks (Alavi & Dufner, 2005). In the recentyears, the focus of knowledge construction moved from knowledge attainment to skill development knowledgein order to prepare students for the challenges of the 21st century (Wen, Zaid & Harun, 2015). The focus movedfrom simply gathering information to a more complex process of researching and thinking critically about thenew information in order to use it in meaningful ways.The joint construction of knowledge allows learners to experience a greater level of understanding(Kafai & Resnick, 1996) because they must construct their own knowledge to learn the truth (Tam, 2000).Knowledge is constructed by students when they participate and evaluate their own learning. Collaborativeknowledge construction encourages students to investigate deeper about a subject so that can reach their highestpotential level of development. The development of new understanding is coming as a combination of priorknowledge and skills with new experiences.An educational robotics class can potentially contribute to the collaborative knowledge constructionprocess. In a learning environment, educational robotics has the role of mindtools. The term “mindtools”, asproposed by Jonassen (2000) in the sense of cognitive tools, represent the constructionism dimension ofconstructivism. Using educational robotics as mindtools, in a classroom, we apply constructivism -- studentsconstruct a physical object, while at the same time they construct problem solving knowledge. Learning is nolonger teacher-centered but knowledge is actively constructed by the learner (Harel & Papert, 1991). Studentscan change or negotiate their existing knowledge into explicit knowledge. Knowledge construction is therefore,formed through a dual pathway; through interaction with the artifact and through interaction with peers. Severalstudies indicate that educational robotics can be used as mindtools supporting knowledge construction throughthe design of meaningful artifacts in authentic projects, learning by doing, facing cognitive conflicts andlearning by reflection and collaboration (Mikropoulos & Bellou, 2013; Jonassen, 2000).Learning designPedagogical aspectsICLS 2018 Proceedings497© ISLSOur work draws on social constructivism, which emphasizes the importance of social interaction in knowledgeconstruction (Palincsar, 1998). Many popular educational formats such as problem-based learning andcomputer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) have their roots in social constructivism, which states thatgroup discussions can help students learn. In this work, we see educational robotics as fully compatible with thenature of collocated CSCL. The technology provides a way to infuse real world experiences to the CSCLsetting, through the hands-on nature of collaborative activities they can facilitate. Also, in line with problembased learning pedagogy, we aim for students, in groups, to engage in problem-solving processes such asdefining the problem, developing a strategy, testing and experimenting, and reflecting in and on action (Ioannou,Vasiliou, Zaphiris, 2016). Problem-based learning helps situate learning in meaningful tasks and emphasises theimportance of practical experience in learning (Hmelo-Silver, 2004; Ioannou, Brown, & Artino, 2015). In CSCLenvironments, participants are actively engaged in creating or co-constructing knowledge. Although in mostCSCL studies, collaboration takes place through a computer network, face-to-face interactions have proven tobe the richest communication media, conveying the greatest social presence (Newberry, 2001), andconsequently, increasing the quality of learning and the achievement of learning objectives (Aspden & Helm,2004).Educational robotics activities and processesDesigning the technology-enhanced learning experience was a task undertaken by a teacher and an educationaltechnologist. We used the Lego Mindstorms EV3 toolkit. Content for the activities came from: a) the nationalcurriculum on mathematics and science education, and b) the EV3 STEM curriculum. Typically, the teacherpresented students with a challenge and a mat. There was no clear path to the solution; students could adopt anystrategy to come to a solution to the challenge. The teacher acted as a facilitator, supporting student’s thinkingwithout providing any answers. Upon completion of each task, a debriefing phase took place: groupsdemonstrated their strategies in addressing the challenge and they answered questions asked by the teacher andstudents in other groups. The teacher facilitated discussion on best strategies and reflection on what kinds ofproblem-solving and STEM skills were learnt. Sample activities are presented in Table 1 while Figure 1summarizes the learning cycle.Figure 1. Typical problem-solving cycle of an educational robotics activity.We further decided to assign roles within teams to encourage positive interdependence, interaction, andgroup processing and to ensure that everyone contributes and participates in the learning process. We assignedthree distinct roles: the recorder (responsible for taking notes and keeping track of group data), the programmer(responsible for the programming and controlling the movements of the robot using a tablet), and the distancemeasurer (responsible for measuring the position of the robot, putting the robot to the starting line, andobserving carefully the robot moves in order to give feedback to the rest of the group). In practice, the roles areinterdepended. That is, the programmer interacts with the distance-measurer to acquire relevant data throughmeasurements or through distance-measurer’s own observations on the robot’s behaviour. The distance-ICLS 2018 Proceedings498© ISLSmeasurer interacts with the recorder to report data for recording. The recorder interacts with programmer toindicate the readiness of the data collection for further action or give auxiliary data based on current datacollection that may help with programming the robot. Roles were randomly assigned to students. From task totask the teacher ensured that the roles rotated amongst the team-members.Table 1: Sample educational robotics learning activitiesActivityExplanationMain STEM PillarsMaze challenge (80 min)Groups program the robot to move fromits starting position through a withouttouching any walls.Numbers & calculations, robotsensors, robot wheels diameter andspeed vs. turns, loops,measurementsRobot-slalom challenge (80 min)Groups program a robot to move alongthe outside of each flag and cross thefinish.Numbers & calculations, robotsensors, geometrical symmetry,swing turn and point turn, loops,measurementsDraw a hexagon challenge (80 min).Students program their robot to draw ahexagon using a gyro sensor.Numbers & calculations, polygons,supplementary & complementaryangles, internal & external angles,design a pen holder, measurementsField studyParticipants, setting and data collectionOur sample was composed of 14 students (6 males) in Grades 4, 5 and 6 (9-11 years old) who attended a publicelementary school in Cyprus. Students were divided into 4 groups, mixing gender, technological, and problemsolving abilities. There were two weeks of preparation activities to help students get familiar with the EV3 robot(e.g., move straight ahead, turn base on some angle, use sensors, robot decisions e.g., loops), followed by three80-minutes sessions of STEM problem-solving activities. Two cameras were placed in the room to fully coverstudent interaction and technology use. Verbal contributions were captured separately via audio recorders nextto each team; audio was later synced with the video.Coding of video data and plotting chronological diagramsAll video data were transcribed verbatim and content analyzed. We used the coding scheme reported inGunawardena, Lowe, & Anderson’s (1997) Interaction Analysis Model, which conceptualizes the level of socialand collaborative knowledge construction. The analysis focused on the “unit of meaning”, each unit fitting intoa sole category of the coding scheme (e.g., from minute 0:30 to 0:35 teammates share ideas on potentialstrategies). Overlapping talk was attributed to the most dominant category and team member. Around 30% ofthe video was coded by the first researcher, with a second researcher independently coding the same units.Reliability was high (agreement over 90%) and therefore, the first researcher finished coding the completedataset. Table 2 presents examples of application of the coding scheme.Table 2: Examples of application of the coding scheme of collaborative knowledge constructionLevelKC-1: Sharing/comparing/ adding ofinformation.ICLS 2018 ProceedingsOperationStatement of observation, opinionor a background information;Definition description oridentification of a problem;499Example excerpts from the dataP2: “We will use the ultrasonic sensor toavoid the flags.© ISLSKC-2: Discovery andexploration ofdissonance orinconsistency.KC-3: Negotiation ofmeaning/coconstruction ofknowledge.KC-4: Testing andmodification ofproposed synthesis orco-construction.KC-5: Agreement/application of newlyconstructed meaning.Identifying areas of disagreement;Asking and answering questions toclarify disagreement; Restatingparticipant’s position.Negotiation or clarification of themeaning (building on previousstatements); Synthesis-proposal,and negotiation of new statements(creating solutions);Testing of new synthesis againstexisting cognitive knowledge,personal experience, and formaldata with the prospect of finalizingit.Summarization of agreements;Application of new knowledge;Metacognitive statementsillustrated changes of in knowledgeP3: “No, we tried using the ultrasonic sensorwhen we solved the maze challenge andtook us a lot of time. What do you think”?P4: “I will draw a hexagon to find howmany triangles are formed.” P5: “So, 4triangles multiplies by 180° equals 720°divides by 6 angles…(thinking) 120°”.P5: “No, what is he doing? It is turning toomuch (while observing the drawing of therobot). What went wrong?” P6: “There is aproblem with the gyro sensor. Let's removeit and put it back”P13: “Yes, that’s it. Bravo! The robot mustturn as much as the supplementary angle ofthe internal angle. That was clever.”For a chronological investigation of within-group collaboration, we further plotted student’s discourseand activity on chronological diagrams. We used the CORDTRA technique, initially suggested by Hmelo-Silveret al. (2011). This technique of visual representation enables one to combine the chronological visual ofdiscourse with other types of coded data allowing for the examination of patterns and behavioral sequences.Findings and discussionEmbodied interaction with the physical robot is linked to higher levels of knowledgeconstructionBased on Table 3, out of 172 coded units, the majority of verbal interactions (38,4%) was coded in the lowestlevel of knowledge construction (KC-1). This was followed by students’ KC-4 level involving 43 verbal units(25%) and KC-3 level involving 37 verbal units (21,5%). KC-2, appeared with a relatively lower percentagethan expected with only 18 coded units or 10,6%. The highest level of knowledge construction (KC-5), wasdifficult to achieve and was only represented by 8 units (4,5%). Gunawardena, Lowe, and Anderson’sInteraction Analysis Model has been almost exclusively used only in online learning discourse in CMS andCSCL settings (e.g., Ioannou, Demetriou & Mama, 2014). According to these studies, KC-1 statementsaccounted for the largest percentage of the overall discussion and were prerequisite for subsequent higher leversof knowledge construction. The findings of the present study differ from typical results of online learningactivity in that, KC-4 accounted for the second largest proportion of discourse units.Table 3: Number of Codes Across Levels of Knowledge Construction and GroupsSharing/adding (KC-1)Exploration of dissonance (KC-2)Negotiating meaning (KC-3)Testing synthesis (KC-4)Applying co-constructed knowledge (KC-5)Group 120516133Group 2156992Group 3123460Group 41948153Total (%)66 (38,4%)18 (10,6%)37 (21.5%)43 (25%)8 (4.5%)Total57412549172(100%)The increased KC-4, compared to previous CMC and CSCL studies, lead us to hypothesize thateducational robotics might have encouraged knowledge construction at this level because of the hands-onexperimentation and embodied interaction with the physical robot. We therefore, used chronological diagrams,to pinpoint what students were doing, when they exhibited KC-4 of knowledge construction. By zooming intothe groups’ chronological diagrams, we found that “Execution of Plan” was tightly coupled with higher levels ofknowledge construction. That is when students interacted with the physical robot to execute their plan, theyICLS 2018 Proceedings500© ISLSoften engaged in KC3-KC5 (see Figure 2). Students were engaged in a process of “conversation with therobots”, through which they promoted self-directed learning and engaged in the construction of new knowledge.The physical and embodied interaction with the robot gave students the opportunity to test or modify their newsynthesis (KC-4) against existing cognitive knowledge, personal experiences, and data.Fair contribution by teammates adhering to predefined roles is linked to higher levelsof knowledge constructionWe found that collaborative knowledge construction was more evidenced in some groups than others. Groups 1,2 and 4 appeared successful in engaging in the collaborative knowledge construction process, since theirdiscourse involved contributions along all phases of knowledge construction. On the other hand, group 3 withonly 25 coded units demonstrated limited engagement with the activities, whilst their discourse never reachedthe higher levels of knowledge construction. This case made us hypothesize that lack of within group interactionmight have hindered collaborative knowledge construction. We therefore took a closer look at videos andchronological diagrams of all groups (see Figure 2; due to space limitations we present only the visuals of 2groups) to pinpoint patterns of collaboration in relation to knowledge construction. We found that in groups 1,2and 4 all teammates were active participants in the learning process, whilst they participated fairly, adhering totheir predefined roles. Instead, members of group 3 did not serve their pre-defined roles and did not participatefairly in the tasks which seems to have led to failure in engaging in collaborative knowledge construction. Ittherefore appears that, assigning roles to teammates and serving these roles enabled fair contribution, individualaccountability and social interdependence (Johnson et al., 1991) leading to better quality discourse andknowledge construction.Cognitive dissonance is linked to higher levels of knowledge constructionA detailed examination of chronological visuals and associated groups’ discourse helped us understand theprogressive interactions and breakdowns within each group. We noted that KC-2 (discovery and exploration ofdissonance or inconsistency) was relatively rare in students’ contributions (only 10,6%). What’s more, whenKC-2 type of discourse appeared, it took a while for the next level of contribution to appear. We thereforesought to understand cognitive dissonance and when it occurred. Zooming into the groups’ chronologicaldiagrams and associated discourse, we found that cognitive dissonance was less often related to disagreementbetween the teammates and more often related to the robot’s failure to perform the expected outcomes duringthe execution of a planned strategy (stage 3 of Figure 1). In this case, students had to reconsider their strategies(i.e., going back to stage 2 of Figure 1). The finding suggests that the robot and its failure to deliver the expectedresult was a mediator to the discovery of cognitive dissonance or inconsistency; the latter was a time-consumingprocess which teammates struggled to overcome. Nevertheless, when the group overcame this stage, theyengaged in higher levels of knowledge construction as evidenced in their chronological discourse. That is,inspection of the chronological diagrams of groups 1, 2 and 4 makes obvious that KC-2 contributions, i.e.,cognitive dissonance mostly related to the robot’s failure to perform, are followed by contributions coded in thehigher levels of knowledge construction (see Figure 2).Level 1Level 2Level 3Level 4Level 5Phase 1Phase 2Phase 3Phase 4Robot useWorksheet020ICLS 2018 Proceedings406080100120140Time (min.)501160180200220240© ISLSLevel 1Level 2Level 3Level 4Level 5Stage 1Stage 2Stage 3Stage 4Robot useWorksheets020406080100120Time (min)140160180200220240Figure 2. Chronological visual for group 1 and 2. The time of the contribution runs at the horizontal axis and thediscourse-coded levels and the stages of the problem-solving cycle are listed on the vertical axis.ConclusionThis work begins to collect the much-needed evidence around the practical utility and potential impact ofeducational robotics in school contexts. We described the design of a learning experience using EV3 educationalrobotics, allowing 14 students in the math and science classroom to engage in collaborative learning andproblem-solving. We addressed the effectiveness of educational robotics in terms of collaborative knowledgeconstruction in the STEM field. The findings demonstrated how knowledge is constructed and which elementsof educational robotics and teamwork can promote collaborative knowledge construction in an educationallearning environment. Overall, we offer a case study in which established pedagogy (problem-based pedagogy)blends with technological capabilities (robotics) to enable students to practically apply the key elements they arebeing exposed to in their STEM education curriculum. Educators can use these findings to develop interventionsto assist students in engaging in higher levels of knowledge construction using educational robotics.ReferencesAlavi, M., & Dufner, D. (2005). Technology-mediated collaborative learning: A research perspective. Learningtogether online: Research on asynchronous learning networks, 91-213.Alimisis, D. (2013). Educational robotics: Open questions and new challenges. Themes in Science andTechnology Education, 6(1), 63-71.Ardito, G., Mosley, P., & Scollins, L. (2014). WE, ROBOT: Using robotics to promote collaborative andmathematics learning in a middle school classroom. Middle Grades Research Journal, 9(3), 73.Aspden, L., & Helm, P. (2004). Making the connection in a blended learning environment. Educational MediaInternational, 41(3), 245-252.Barak, M., & Zadok, Y. (2009). Robotics projects and learning concepts in science, technology and problemsolving, International Journal of Technology and Design Education, 19(3), 289-307.Barker, B. S., Grandgenett, N., Nugent, G., & Adamchuk, V. I. (2010). Robots, GPS/GIS, and programmingtechnologies: the power of “digital manipulatives” in youth extension experiences. Journal ofExtension, 48(1), 1-9.Barker, B. S., Nugent, G., Grandgenett, N., & Hampton, A. (2008). Examining 4-H robotics in the learning ofscience, engineering and technology topics and the related student attitudes. Journal of YouthDevelopment, 2(3), 17.Barker, B. S., & Ansorge, J. (2007). Robotics as Means to Increase Achievement Scores in an InformalLearning Environment. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 39(3), 229-243.Benitti, F. B. V. (2012). Exploring the educational potential of robotics in schools: A systematicreview. Computers & Education, 58(3), 978-988.Bers, M. U., & Portsmore, M. (2005). Teaching partnerships: Early childhood and engineering students teachingmath and science through robotics. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 14(1), 59-73.Bilotta, E., Gabriele, L., Servidio, R., & Tavernise, A. (2009). Edutainment Robotics as LearningTool. Transactions on Edutainment III Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 25-35Eguchi, A. (2010). What is educational robotics? Theories behind it and practical implementation. In D. Gibson& B. Dodge (eds.), Proceedings of Society for Information Technology & Teacher EducationInternational Conference 2010 (pp. 4006-4014). Chesapeake, VA: AACEICLS 2018 Proceedings502© ISLSHarel, I., & Papert, S. (1991). Constructionism. Norwood.Highfield, K. (2010). Robotic toys as a catalyst for mathematical problem solving. Australian PrimaryMathematics Classroom, 15(2), 22-27.Hong, J. C., Yu, K. C., & Chen, M. Y. (2011). Collaborative learning in technological project design.International Journal Technology & Design Education, 21(3), 335-347.Gunawardena, C. N., Lowe, C. A., & Anderson, T. (1997). Analysis of a global online debate and thedevelopment of an interaction analysis model for examining social construction of knowledge incomputer conferencing. Journal of educational computing research, 17(4), 397-431.Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2004). Problem-based learning: What and how do students learn?. Educational psychologyreview, 16(3), 235-266.Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Jordan, R., Liu, L., & Chernobilsky, E. (2011). Representational tools for understandingcomplex computer-supported collaborative learning environments. In Analyzing interactions inCSCL (pp. 83-106). Springer US.Ioannou, A., Brown, S. W., & Artino, A. R. (2015). Wikis and forums for collaborative problem-based activity:A systematic comparison of learners' interactions. The Internet and Higher Education, 24, 35-45.Ioannou, A., Demetriou, S., & Mama, M. (2014). Exploring factors influencing collaborative knowledgeconstruction in online discussions: Student facilitation and quality of initial postings. American Journalof Distance Education, 28(3), 183-195.Ioannou, A., Vasiliou, C., & Zaphiris, P. (2016). Problem Based Learning in Multimodal LearningEnvironments: Learners’ Technology Adoption Experiences. Journal of Educational ComputingResearch, 54 (7), 1022-1040.Johnson, D. W., Johnson, R. T., & Smith, K. A. (1991). Cooperative learning: increasing college facultyinstructional productivity. Washington, DC: School of Education and Human Development, GeorgeWashington University.Jonassen, D. H. (2000). Computers as mindtools for schools: Engaging critical thinking. Prentice Hall.Kafai, Y., & Resnick, M., (1996). Constructionism in practice: Designing, thinking, and learning in a digitalworld. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.Larkins, D. B., Moore, J. C., Rubbo, L. J., & Covington, L. R. (2013). Application of the cognitiveapprenticeship framework to a middle school robotics camp. In Proceeding of the 44th ACM TechnicalSymposium on Computer Science Education (pp. 89-94). New York, NY, USA: ACM. 2445226.Mikropoulos, T. A., & Bellou, I. (2013). Educational robotics as mindtools. Themes in Science and TechnologyEducation, 6(1), 5-14.Mitnik, R., Recabarren, M., Nussbaum, M., & Soto, A. (2009). Collaborative robotic instruction: A graphteaching experience. Computers & Education, 53(2), 330-342.Mitnik, R., Nussbaum, M., & Soto, A. (2008). An autonomous educational mobile robot mediator. AutonomousRobots, 25(4), 367-382.Nagchaudhuri, A., Singh, G., Kaur, M., & George, S. (2002). LEGO robotics products boost student creativityin precollege programs at UMES. 32nd Annual Frontiers in Education.Newberry, B. (2001). Raising student presence in online classes. Webnet 2000: World Conference on the WWWand Internet Proceedings. Orlando, Florida, October 23–27, 2001.Nugent, G., Barker, B., Grandgenett, N., & Adamchuk, V. (2009). The use of digital manipulatives in k-12:robotics, GPS/GIS and programming. In Frontiers in education conference, 2009. FIE ’09. 39th IEEE(pp. 1–6, 18–21).Nugent, G., Barker, B., Grandgenett, N., & Adamchuk, V. I. (2010). Impact of Robotics and GeospatialTechnology Interventions on Youth STEM Learning and Attitudes. Journal of Research on Technologyin Education, 42(4), 391-408.Palincsar, A. S. (1998). Social constructivist perspectives on teaching and learning. Annual review ofpsychology, 49(1), 345-375.Sullivan, F. R. (2008). Robotics and science literacy: thinking skills, science process skills and systemsunderstanding. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 45(3), 373–394.Tam, M. (2000). Constructivism, instructional design, and technology: Implications for transforming distancelearning. Educational Technology & Society, 3(2), 50-60.Wen, A. S., Zaid, N. M., & Harun, J. (2015). A Meta-analysis on Students' Social Collaborative KnowledgeConstruction using Flipped Classroom Model. In e-Learning, e-Management and e-Services (IC3e),2015 IEEE Conference on(pp. 58-63). IEEE.ICLS 2018 Proceedings503© ISLS