Assessing Equity in Collaborative Learning Situations:A Comparison of MethodsMichael Slattery, Grinnell College, slattery1@grinnell.eduPaul Hutchison, Grinnell College, hutchiso@grinnell.eduAbstract: We set out to apply methods for assessing equity in a collaborative learning situationof four college students. To do this, we utilized prior work assessing equity in programmingpairs (Lewis & Shah, 2015; Shah, Lewis, & Caires, 2014) and coded for talking time, questionsasked, and commands givne. Using these methods to analyze two different groups we found thegroups to be very similar. However, our sense was that the groups were not similar in regard toequity. We then used an adapted version of Duek’s (2000) group processing behaviors to codeand analyze the two groups. This method indicated that one group engaged in far more equitypromoting behaviors than the other, suggesting a difference in the relative equity between them.Keywords: equity, research methods, processing behaviors, collaborative learningIntroductionCollaborative learning in small groups has been identified as an instructional practice that can support students’conceptual understanding and create the potential for a more equitable learning environment (Esmonde, 2009;O’Donnell, & Hmelo-Silver, 2013). Though some also worry poorly designed collaborative work has the potentialto exacerbate inequity rather than promote equity. Because there is reason to be both hopeful and cautious,understanding equity-dynamics in collaborative learning contexts is important work for our research community.Developing that understanding will be complicated. As a beginning point, one must define and thenoperationalize equity in collaborative learning contexts; no small task. Like others in this community (LangerOsuna, 2011, Shah, Lewis, & Caires, 2014, Lewis & Shah, 2015, Dietrick, Shapiro, & Gravel, 2016) we findEsmonde’s (2009) conceptualization of equity, from math education, useful when paying attention to equity incollaborative science learning contexts. Esmonde characterizes equity as “…the fair distribution of opportunitiesto learn…”, going on to identify two kinds of access to attend to, “…students’ access to mathematical content anddiscourse practices…” as well as “…their access to (positional) identities as knowers and doers of mathematics…”(p. 249). This characterization captures the potential we see for both the positive and negative equity-outcomes incollaborative learning situations. Equity is about fair access to opportunities. Compared with didactic learningsituations, we expect learners have greater potential for access to content, discourse practices, and identities; butthe social dynamics of collective problem solving may function to diminish such access for some group members.Taking Esmonde’s characterization as a starting point, the next task is to operationalize it. In our case,we aim to do quantitative analysis that allows for comparisons like, for example, different activities done by thesame group or different groups engaged in the same activity. Our interest in quantitative methods, as opposed toqualitative ones, is pragmatic. Both contribute to the development of a rich understanding. Quantitative methodsmake analysis across multiple groups over longer periods of time more practical, which is why we areinvestigating them. A common quantitative method is to identify behaviors that serve as an indicator of equityand code video data for those behaviors. (ie. Lewis & Shah, 2015; Dietrick, Shapiro, & Gravel, 2016) Commonlyused equity indicators are the distribution of talking time or turns of talk, commands given, and questions asked.Typically researches track the quantity of the behavior for each individual learner and assume that a moreequitable situation will yield a more equal distribution of the behaviors.Notably, these studies acknowledge that the distribution of indicators is at best a rough proxy for equity.This is one of the trade-offs one makes when choosing quantitative over qualitative methods. We value the useof rough proxies; it makes our goal of analysis of larger sets of data possible. But we question whether equaldistribution is a reasonable proxy for equity. While it is easy to imagine extreme cases where, say, one studentdominates the activity of a group, it also seems likely that there are group contexts where some students bid tocontribute to the intellectual or social discourse and are rebuffed by other group members. A student whose bid isunsuccessful may lose access to content, discourse practices, and identities. In those cases, measuring thesebehaviors may not give reasonable insight into equity.We set out to investigate and compare a variety of methods for “measuring” equity in collaborativelearning situations. In this paper, we report on a comparison of two different methodologies for assessing equity.We had access to an extensive data set of videos of collaborative learning situations in a pre-orientation programfor students about to begin school at their undergraduate institution. In the course of comparing all five studentICLS 2018 Proceedings1149© ISLSgroups in a class when they were engaged in the same activity, we somewhat luckily stumbled across two groupsengaged who (1) appeared markedly different to us in terms of Esmonde’s (2009) conceptualization of equity and(2) had remarkably similar distributions of talking times, questions asked, and commands. In what follows wefirst describe the comparison of the two groups using talking time and commands given analyses. Then, wedescribe how we adapted Duek’s (2000) group processing behaviors into a coding scheme and describe the twogroups through that analysis. The first analysis suggests the two groups are very similar, while the groupprocessing behavior analysis shows large differences.MethodsThe video data analyzed in this paper comes from the Integrating Metacognitive Practices and Research to EnsureStudent Success (IMPRESS) program. This is a two-week pre-orientation program aimed at supporting scienceinterested deaf/hard-of-hearing students and first generation students about to start their first year at the RochesterInstitute of Technology (RIT). (Franklin et al., in preparation) A large set of data, including videos fromcollaborative learning activities, has been accumulated by a research group that uses the program as a site for datacollection.The IMPRESS program’s content focuses is on climate change. We analyzed the activity of all five ofgroups in one session when they worked to construct a physical model of the atmosphere. As we note above twoof the groups were remarkably similar in the typical equity indicators but intuitively appeared very different interms of equity. “Group A” contained three female students, Brittany, Arya, and Pat, and one male student, Daniel(all names are pseudonyms). “Group B” was all male and contained Justin, Jakob, Herb, and Brock. The data forthis paper comes from the second day of the program. Our analysis focuses on the same 20-minute time periodfor each group.In the following analysis, we first use a system similar to Shah and Lewis’ (2015) scheme to quantify thedistribution of talking time, questions, and commands by each individual in each group. We used BORIS softwareto record start and stop times of each utterance and mark questions and commands. Then we used an adaptedversion of Duek’s (2000) group processing behaviors to code the same data. A description of that coding schemeis provided below. As this is relatively new analysis for us we first created transcripts of each group to allow foreasier comparison of different coders’ codes. We broke the 20-minute period into 5 minute segments andindependently coded a few of the segments. We compared results and talked through instances of disagreementuntil we resolved each difference.Results and discussionThe first quantitative measure analyzed was talking time, shown in Table 1. The groups are surprisingly similarin distribution of talking time among participants. The percentage of the total time that each student wasresponsible for is within 1 or 2 percent of the person from the other group in the same rank-ordered position. Forexample, Britany and Justin talked the most in their groups, 38 and 40 percent of the total talking time respectively.Arya and Brock ranked third in their groups, 20 and 19 percent respectively. We compare the percentagedistribution here because of the difference in the overall time spent talking by each group. The members of GroupB had almost five more minutes of talking time in aggregate than Group A, 1112 seconds compared to 844seconds, during the twenty-minute segment. This disparity is caused by the students of Group B engaging in asignificant amount of overlapping talk, while the students of group A tended to take turns when talking.Table 1: Distribution of Talking Time and Commands IssuedGroup ATime (s)%Commands%Group BTime (s)%Commands%Britany321382571Justin4454000Daniel24729514Jakob329301976Arya17220514Brock19518312Pat1041200Herb14213312Total844Total11123525The second measure on which the groups were similar was commands issued, also shown in Table 1. Ineach group one student dominated the number of commands issued with the other three students having a few orICLS 2018 Proceedings1150© ISLSzero commands. An interesting difference that bears comment is Justin, in Group B. He is the student who speaksthe most yet he gives no commands. Justin’s talk is largely arguing in support of his ideas when they disagreewith the ideas of others. He is also the student who takes the group off task a couple of times. So, while Justintalks frequently he is not directing the on-task progress of the group.Based on the assumption that equality is a rough proxy for equity, the similar distribution of talking timesand commands in these two groups suggests they are relatively similar in terms of equity. Perhaps based on thefact that there is wide variance in how much different group members talk and how commands are distributed weshould consider these groups relatively inequitable. However, when watching and analyzing the video of eachgroup, the discourse in Group A appears to offer greater support for all students’ access to content, discoursepractices, and identities than Group B. The members of Group A support each other’s access to such opportunitieswhile the members of Group B engage in a significant amount of closing off access to opportunities.Our sense of this difference was based on how members of each group interacted with one another, thatis, the discourse that occurred between them. So, we looked for coding schemes of group interaction behaviors inthe context of assessing for equity and found Duek’s (2000) work. We considered which of her behaviors weregood candidate coding categories for our data. For example, several were not behaviors we could reliably codeand we discarded them. We added an “Ignoring” code because we saw the behavior occasionally and it is a similartype to other behaviors Duek identified. We then considered whether each behavior we could reliably codepromoted or demoted equity, using Esmonde’s (2009) characterization of equity to guide our choice. Weconsidered whether each behavior could be identified as promoting or demoting access to content, discoursepractices, and identities. In cases where the outcome was unclear or seemed ambiguous we removed the codefrom our analysis. We ended up with the eight codes listed in Table 2. The fact that there are four each thatpromote and demote equity was not planned, but we like that feature of what we are left with.Table 2: Group Processing Behaviors with description and impact on equityBehaviorEncouraging/EnergizingOrienting/ClarifyingGatekeepingForwardingIgnoringOvertalking/AggressingIndividualBlockingDerailing/Group blockingDescriptionStatements or actions that promote the ideas or statementsof another studentStatements or questions that attempt to clarify/understandan idea or action in the groupAttempts to get any/all members of the group to participatein the discussion or activityTaking a leadership role in moving the group towardscompletion of the task at handNot verbally engaging or acknowledging the ideas orattempts to contribute of another member of the group.Talking louder while another student is talking, makingharsh comments or tone of voice toward another studentAny action or statement that prevents another student fromcontributing their ideas to the groupStatements or actions that cause the group to become offtask or lose focus on the taskEquity ImpactPromotesPromotesPromotesPromotesDemotesDemotesDemotesDemotesWe then coded the same data using our Duek-inspired coding scheme. Frequencies of each behaviorcategory are shown in Table 3. There are a number of things to point out. The most notable is to look at thedifferent percentages of equity-promoting and equity-demoting behaviors in each group. In group A, the one weperceived as being the more equitable of the two, there was a fairly equal split between equity-promoting andequity-demoting codes. In group B, the less equitable of the two, there were far more equity-demoting codes thanequity-promoting ones. So overall this coding matches our intuitive sense of the relative difference between thetwo groups.We also note that several codes are markedly different across the two groups. We are interested to see ifthese differences are a function of these two groups of if they will hold up with other groups. The complete ornear absence of Encouraging/Energizing, Forwarding, Ignoring, and Individual Blocking in one but not the othergroup leads us to wonder if presence or absence of those behaviors are particularly salient markers of equity.Other behavior codes are frequent in both groups. Overtalking, an equity-demoting code, is the mostfrequent code (or nearly so) in both groups, but a larger percentage of the total in Group B, the less equitableICLS 2018 Proceedings1151© ISLSgroup. Its frequent presence in both groups is unsurprising. The social dynamics of four students collaborating issimply going to involve overtalking. Orienting/Clarifying, an equity-promoting behavior, occurs equally in bothgroups, though it is a larger percentage in group A, the more equitable group. Again, this seems unsurprising, fourstudents working together should involve instances of seeking clarification or explanation. But in both cases, thepercentage supports our sense of more or less equity in the groups.Table 3: Group Processing Behaviors exhibited by each groupBehaviorsGroup A%BehaviorsEncouraging/Energizing713Encouraging/Energizing11Orienting/Clarifying1629Orienting/Clarifying1618Gatekeeping00Gatekeeping00Forwarding59Forwarding11Ignoring00Ignoring89Overtalking/Aggressing1426Overtalking/Aggressing4754Individual Blocking00Individual Blocking45Derailing/Group blocking1324Derailing/Group blocking1012Equity Promoting2851Equity Promoting1821Equity Demoting2749Equity Demoting6979total55total87Group B%ConclusionAs the above section hopefully communicates, we are excited that this processing behavior coding schemeproduces a result that is robustly consistent with our sense of which group was more or less equitable comparedto the other. That suggests there is potential for a useful rough proxy for equity. We are driven by many questionsthese analyses beg. We want better calibration for this coding instrument, which analysis of more and differentdata will provide. We wonder how the number of group members matters. Much of the work we look at formethodological guidance focuses on programming pairs in computer science. What systematic differences shouldwe expect when groups get larger? We look forward to continuing to investigate and refine this coding scheme.ReferencesDeitrick, E., Shapiro, R., & Gravel, B. (2016). How Do We Assess Equity in Programming? Pairs? ICLSProceedings, 370-377.Duek, J. E. (2000). Whose group is it, anyway? Equity of student discourse in problem-based learning. Problembased Learning: A Research Perspective on Learning Interactions, 75-107.Esmonde, I. (2009). Mathematics learning in groups: Analyzing equity in two cooperative activity structures. TheJournal of the Learning Sciences, 18(2), 247-289.Franklin, S., Hane, E., & Ptak, C. (in preparation). Improving retention through metacognition: A program fordeaf/ hard-of-hearing and first-generation STEM college students.Langer-Osuna, J. M. (2011). How Brianna became bossy and Kofi came out smart: Understanding the trajectoriesof identity and engagement for two group leaders in a project-based mathematics classroom. CanadianJournal of Science, Mathematics and Technology Education, 11(3), 207-225.Lewis, C. M., & Shah, N. (2015). How equity and inequity can emerge in pair programming. Proceedings of theeleventh annual International Conference on International Computing Education Research, 41-50.O’Donnell, A., & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2013). What is collaborative learning? An overview. In C. E. HmeloSilver, C. A. Chinn, C. K. K. Chan, & A. O’Donnell (Eds.). The international handbook of collaborativelearning (pp. 1-15). New York, NY: Routledge.Shah, N., Lewis, C.M., & Caires, R. (2014). Analyzing equity in collaborative learning situations: A comparativecase study in elementary computer science. Proceedings of the 2014 Annual Conference of the LearningSciences. Boulder, CO. Boulder, CO.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1152© ISLS