Can Speaking Make Learning Easier? Verbal Rehearsal Effects onCognitive Load, Learning Efficacy and PerformanceToni Hatten-Roberts, Charles Sturt University, Australia, hattentoni@gmail.comJason M. Lodge, University of Queensland, Australia, jason.lodge@uq.edu.auAbstract: In the study reported here, the effectiveness of verbal rehearsal as a learning strategythat could mediate extraneous load effects and increase learning was examined within theresearch area of Cognitive Load Theory. While the learning outcomes between the groups didnot differ significantly, participants who verbally rehearsed the material found learning the newmaterial less challenging and reported lower levels of cognitive load. Results imply verbalrehearsal may be an effective method to enhance learning.IntroductionUnderstanding the cognitive processes of working memory capacity can enable us to make better educationaldecisions in the way instruction is delivered to students. The use of multimedia learning typically used inclassrooms has the ability to impede learning by increasing the cognitive load demands on students. This is oftendue to substandard instructional design such as unnecessary irrelevant information or seductive details. Activelearning strategies, on the other hand have been found to mediate extraneous load conditions, but can also riskadding to the load conditions. Well supported assumptions of Cognitive Load Theory (CLT) maintain thatpresentation approaches which reduce the amount of cognitive load caused by extraneous sources, such as addedredundant information, will improve the learning performance of the student (Mayer & Moreno, 1998). In theory,these cognitive load effects are based on our understanding of human cognitive processing systems, primarily thatwe have a limited working memory capacity (Clark, Nguyen, & Sweller, 2011). Self-efficacy can also play animportant role in predicting performance on learning and is considered an important component in learningachievement. Learning strategies that can enhance self-efficacy, could also increase learning. Therefore, in thisstudy, the effect of the inclusion of seductive details and the possible mediating effect of a germane strategy (i.e.verbal rehearsal) on learning performance and perceived interest, confidence and challenge (as per Bandura, 1993)were explored.The present studyUsing a 2 x 2 x 2 repeated measures experimental design (see figure 1.), one hundred participants were randomlyallocated to four learning conditions with varying cognitive load requirements (with vs. without seductive details),in a consistent low-load modality (visual + narration only) when learners were engaged in a germane load activity(with active verbal rehearsal vs. without active verbal rehearsal). Verbal rehearsal (Makita et al., 2013) that assistsmemory encoding, as the added germane load was used to explore the underlying question of whether verbalrehearsal as an instructional strategy would stimulate more elaborate cognitive processing and therefore result inbetter learning outcomes. Alternatively, the learner unnecessarily processes the additional cognitive load sourcein the act of verbal rehearsal, resulting in poorer learning.Figure 1. Study design of experimental paradigm.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1423© ISLSDiscussion and resultsWhile learning performance did not differ significantly across the learning conditions, the difference in pre topost test scores did indicate some effect between the verbal and non-verbal groups. Differences in the pre andpost mean scores between the reciting groups and the listening groups, showed a partial eta squared effect sizeof .04, approaching a medium effect. Results did show however that those who rehearsed, found learning thenew material less challenging and reported lower levels of cognitive load (see figure 2.). We also found thatratings of self-perceived learning, were higher for those who had rehearsed the material, indicating the use ofverbal rehearsal supported the participants in feeling more positive about their own learning. Combined withlower levels of cognitive load reported by this same group, averages for the rehearsal group (M = 1.73, SD =1.81) were significantly lower than the non-rehearsal group (M = 3.06, SD = 2.25) with a main effect forrehearsal type yielding an F ratio of F (1, 96) = 10.96, p = .001, partial η2 = .10, a possible beneficial interactionwith working memory demand constraints was revealed (Hoffman & Schraw, 2009). These low ratings ofcognitive load were apparent even though participants were engaged in a germane load activity that could haveadded to the processing demands of working memory.9876543210VerbalNon-VerbalIntrinsic LoadExtraneous Self PerceivedLoadLearningFigure 2. Cognitive load rating means, error bars denote standard error for verbal rehearsal.Summary and conclusionResearch in educational and cognitive psychology continues to search for better ways to present new material inorder to maximize learning and reduce cognitive load. Verbal rehearsal as an instructional strategy may stimulatemore elaborate cognitive processing, and assist in successful encoding without overloading working memorycapacity. Asking students to verbally rehearse the material they are learning, is a simple and cost-effective wayfor students to interact with the instruction. When the cognitive load demands are reduced to meet the needs ofthe student’s working memory capabilities, the learning outcomes for individuals engaged in multimediapresentations could be improved. It is unresolved whether this was of any benefit to performance, however theresults are promising and warrant further investigation.ReferencesBandura, A. (1993). Perceived self-efficacy in cognitive development and functioning. Educational Psychologist,28(2), 117-148. doi: 10.1207/s15326985ep2802_3Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1991). Cognitive load theory and the format of instruction. Cognition and Instruction,8, 293–332. doi: 10.1207/s1532690xci0804_2Clark, R. C., Nguyen, F., & Sweller, J. (2011). Efficiency in learning: Evidence-based guidelines to managecognitive load. San Francisco: CA. John Wiley & Sons. doi: 10.1002/pfi.4930450920Makita, K., Yamazaki, M., Tanabe, H. C., Koike, T., Kochiyama, T., Yokokawa, H., & Sadato, N. (2013). AFunctional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study of Foreign‐Language Vocabulary Learning Enhanced byPhonological Rehearsal: The Role of the Right Cerebellum and Left Fusiform Gyrus. Mind, Brain, andEducation, 7(4), 213-224. doi: 10.1111/mbe.12029Mayer, R. E., & Moreno, R. (1998). A split-attention effect in multimedia learning: evidence for dual processingsystems in working memory. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90, doi: 10.1037/0022-0663.90.2.312Hoffman, B., & Schraw, G. (2009). The influence of self-efficacy and working memory capacity on problemsolvingefficiency.LearningandIndividualDifferences,19(1),91-100.doi:10.1016/j.lindif.2008.08.001ICLS 2018 Proceedings1424© ISLS