Teachers’ Values in Co-Design of an Art-Science-Computation UnitLila Finch, University of Colorado Boulder, lila.forte@colorado.eduR. Benjamin Shapiro, University of Colorado Boulder, ben.shapiro@colorado.eduFranziska Carstens, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, franziska.carstens@uni-muenster.deAbstract: Creating learning environments that bring together the arts, sciences, and computingin education could provide avenues for changing stagnant practices within those disciplines thatcurrently marginalize people with non-normative identities and practices. We examine the codesign process of an interdisciplinary group of teachers crafting a transdisciplinary art-sciencecomputation curriculum unit for their classrooms. Within this context, teachers engaged inrichly metarepresentational discussions wherein they applied values and practices from all threeconstituent fields of study in their design work. We present the results of a qualitative analysisof teacher discourse, showing the wide variety of epistemic criteria marshalled by teacherswithin design discussions as they connected their ordinarily separate disciplines.IntroductionEducational researchers have consistently called for more interdisciplinary approaches to education, especiallyfor nurturing stronger, making-oriented synergies between Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM)and the Arts (STEAM) (Guzdial, 2010; Peppler, 2013; Regalla, 2016), and for valuing a broader set of emotionaland epistemic relationships to STEM (Turkle & Papert, 1992). Peppler and Wohlwend (2017) argue that onebarrier to equitable participation in STEM is the stagnancy of knowledge development and representationpractices, and maker pedagogies that support STEAM learning could broaden participation. For instance, schoolsexpect students in science to produce a small number of canonical representations (e.g. bar graphs) that do littleto invite students with experience producing other representations (e.g. art) to apply skills and identities that theyalready have within science education. They envision the design of nexus learning environments where scienceart-computation practices mediate learning and offer new, inclusive affordances for thinking and learning.Much literature about STEAM describes learning in informal environments (Marallo, 2014; Searle &Kafai, 2015), with some work showing how STEAM can embrace diverse, culturally varying epistemologies(Bang & Medin, 2010). We know little about how nexus learning experiences can unfold within middle and highschool classrooms; how new computational-artistic representational practices can be integrated with the existingschool curriculum, what kinds of professional development experiences can foster disciplinary teachers’ learningabout how to teach using new representational infrastructures (Hall & Jurow, 2015), and what structural barrierswithin schooling might prevent their implementation.We present a case study of a multi-school, multi-disciplinary group of teachers co-designing a sharedunit that uses artistic and computational representational practices to support investigation and representation ofthe biology of classroom gardens. We examine how teachers navigate disciplinary values and content expertisein co-designing transdisciplinary projects for their classrooms. We show how metarepresentational discussion(diSessa, 2004) played a crucial role in their making process, including their learning from one another, and shedlight on what properties teachers might value in representations that are both scientific and artistic.BackgroundOn representation as disciplinary practiceRepresentational infrastructures are the norms for communication about information in disciplines; they arehistorically embedded, transparent, taken-for-granted, visible only upon breakdown, and stretch across time,space, and social participation structures (Hall & Jurow, 2015; Hall, Stevens, & Torralba, 2002). Often theseinfrastructures are exclusive, only permitting people to legitimately participate in disciplines in a small set ofcanonical ways, while excluding people when their backgrounds offer them different representational andepistemic approaches (Bang & Medin, 2010). Nexus learning environments could create room to reimaginerepresentational infrastructures, thereby shaping new forms of induction into disciplinary participation throughvaluing a multiplicity of ways to contribute. For example e-textiles can change the materiality, the domain ofapplication, and the gendered practices of learning electronics (Peppler & Wohlwend, 2017).Related to the study of how representational infrastructures define fields is the study of how learningmetarepresentational skills can further disciplinary learning. Metarepresentational competence refers to the skillsinvolved in constructing or parsing new representations, comparing sets of representations, and describing theICLS 2018 Proceedings663© ISLSpurpose of a representation (diSessa, 2004). Research on metarepresentation examines both whatmetarepresentational competence is, and how it develops over time (Danish & Enyedy, 2006; diSessa, Hammer,Sherin, & Kolpakowski, 1991). One strand of that research examines student and teacher thinking about modelsas representations of scientific phenomena, and in particular, what epistemic criteria they use to evaluate whethera model is a good one (Pluta, Chinn, & Duncan, 2011).Other work addresses the broader question of how new representational media can support novel waysof learning about and conceptualizing disciplinary content (diSessa, 2001; Greeno & Hall, 1997). Nexus learningenvironments may provide expansive opportunities for imagining, discussing, and practicing new representationalinfrastructures, including through the melding of representational techniques across ordinarily separatedisciplines. However, there has been little empirical examination of the benefits and drawbacks of suchapproaches, and we are unaware of any research that investigates how the expansion of teachers’ representationaltools and skills can support their development of more representationally and epistemologically ecumenicalteaching practices. In this study, we examine teachers’ epistemic criteria within the collaborative construction ofartistic and computational representations of scientific phenomena.On co-designCollaborative design, or co-design, is a strategy for increasing teacher agency and practical implementation byforming teams of teachers and researchers to design, implement and test new educational innovations (Severance,Penuel, Sumner, & Leary, 2016). Co-design allows for teachers to ensure that reforms amplify their own voicesthrough addressing the contexts, needs, and routines of their practices (Severance et al., 2016).Storyline authoring is a promising process for science education curriculum co-design (Reiser, 2013). Astoryline is a conjecture about how a coherent flow of instruction could be driven by student questions groundedin phenomena that lead to investigations, modeling, and argumentation (Reiser, 2013; Next Generation ScienceStorylines, n.d.). Thus far, the storylining approach has only been used in contexts where all of the participatingteachers are science educators. In this study, we brought together teachers from several different disciplines tocollaboratively storyline a nexus unit that blends their expertise in art, science, and computation.Luminous Science as science-art-computation nexus learning experienceLuminous Science (LS) is an approach developed by the authors that uses art and computation to create dynamicrepresentations of scientific phenomena. This approach was developed to both expand the representationalinfrastructures of science classrooms, and to create stronger affinities between the values and practices of art,science, and computing education, including artistic inspiration in science. We used a traditional Japanese styleof lantern making, Nebuta, and combined it with networked sensors in a garden to create dynamic illuminationsin the lantern that are indicators of biochemical phenomena inside the plants. The first author began this projectby building her own prototype lantern (Figure 1a) and garden. The Nebuta lanterns use familiar and flexible craftmaterials (e.g. wire, paper, glue, string, and paint) which allow for many choices in form and aesthetics for visualstorytelling. We integrate technology into the lanterns through individually addressable RGB LEDs that arecontrolled by a programmable microcontroller that communicates wirelessly with another microcontroller and itssensors in a hydroponic garden. Computation, therefore, bridges the artistic and scientific practices of LS.To tell the story of scientific phenomena in the garden through the lantern, the scientist-artist must makemetarepresentational choices about what data to use and then how to visualize the data within the physical shapeand dynamic lighting of the lantern. By increasing the scope of possible representational choices, we hope toexpand the metarepresentational choice space that students and teachers enjoy. Two scientist-artists makingseparate lanterns could receive the same data streams but tell quite different stories about the garden throughdiffering choices about how to model and represent the data. Our prototype used data about humidity, temperature,soil moisture, and light as input to a computational model we made about photosynthesis and transpiration. Theoutput of the model is rendered in the body of the lantern via luminous molecules, “sugars” and water, movingthrough the sculpture, simulating the generation, collection and transportation of molecules in the plant.We wish to understand how approaches like LS, through creating a nexus of science, art, andcomputation, could open up science education to a more diverse array of people and practices. As we seek tochange science education, we believe it is crucial to study innovations like LS within school, and not just ininformal learning spaces. To do so, we must train teachers in the technical facets of the work, work with them toco-design units that they could pilot in their own classroom, and then study the resulting instructional contexts.Toward that end, we organized a co-design workshop with multi-disciplinary group of teachers, andguided them through a process of transdisciplinary collaboration wherein they made their own LS lanterns andco-wrote unit plans and storylines. Our research questions are:ICLS 2018 Proceedings664© ISLSRQ1: How do teachers discuss the representational values and practices of each other’s disciplines within theco-design process, particularly within transdisciplinary designing and making?RQ2: What epistemic criteria for science and art do teachers use to make design choices?Figure 1. a) 9-ft tall prototype Nebuta-style sculpture created by the first author. b-d) 2-4-ft artisticdata-driven lanterns made by teachers in the co-design workshop.MethodsWorkshop designThe goal of the workshop was to design a classroom unit around artistically focused data-driven representationsof scientific phenomena in gardens that the teachers would deploy in their classrooms. We anticipated that theresulting nexus learning environment designs might necessitate more flexible eventual implementations since anart teacher might have different needs than a science teacher. Therefore, we collaborated with teachers within aframework of co-design to develop storylines for LS that each teacher felt was appropriate for their context.Within the workshop we asked teachers to 1) make an artistic sensor-data-driven representation of thegarden in the form of a lantern and 2) draft a storyline plan for implementation in their classrooms. Our goals forthe making activity were to have teachers learn the lantern making process and to facilitate conversations amongstthe group of us about how to consider artistic and computational values and practices within science classes, andvice versa. We asked teachers to use a storyline process to develop a sequence of student questions, situated inphenomena, that organize the flow of a unit. Our work here expands on typically mono-subject storyline co-designby bringing together a disciplinarily diverse group of teachers to co-design a nexus storyline.The workshop ran for five four-hour days. On day 1, we introduced the LS project goals and storylining,sketched lanterns in small groups, and discussed implementation in the classroom. On day 2, we introduced wireframe making and papering, made the wire frames, worked within subject areas on storylines, and the teacherssketched lanterns around a specific garden scenario: Inspired by diSessa et al. (1991), we asked groups to sketchand compare lantern designs that would show the transformation of the garden over time if a water pump failed.On day 3, we introduced data visualization techniques, soldering, and the BBC micro:bit hardware, then groupsdesigned mappings between data and the dynamic lights in their lanterns, then finished wire frames and solderedlights. On day 4, the teachers papered and at least partially painted their lanterns, then shared storylines andplanned across schools and subjects. On day 5, we introduced programming sensors and LEDs, and teachersprogrammed the lights for their lanterns to display data (Figure 1b-d) and worked on their storylines.ParticipantsWe partnered with six teachers: Hannah (math and computing) and Kate (science), teach in a rural public middleschool. Adam (art), Susan (environmental science), Elena (physics), and James (chemistry and earth science)teach in a large public urban high school. Both schools are located in the Rocky Mountain region of the UnitedStates. Maggie and Bob, two engineers from a local company that manufactures some of the hardware we used,joined the group for 4 days of the workshop. Bob is a former high school physics teacher, and Maggie is a preservice teacher. The first author is also a former high school art and chemistry teacher.Data collectionAll workshop activities were recorded using four video and four audio recorders. Two cameras’ locations werefixed and showed an overview of the whole room, but the other two shifted in location based on the evolvingfocus of group work. The audio recorders supplemented the camera’s audio, and were placed on tables neargroups. We took still photos of the groupwork, including photos at the end of each day to document teachers’ICLS 2018 Proceedings665© ISLSproducts (e.g. plans, lanterns). The teachers wrote their storyline unit outlines and how they would differentiatethe unit for their own classes in a shared Google Doc. The teachers wrote responses to a set of daily reflectionquestions in a Google Form, and we asked additional reflection questions at the end of the week.Data analysisOur analysis examined the entire week of video (~70 hrs) and audio data. We took a grounded theory approach(Strauss & Corbin, 1997) to understanding what kinds of discussions about how to represent data occurred withinlantern making or unit planning interactions. We performed an exhaustive, low inference search of all the videodata to identify metarepresentational discussions, transcribed these, and then grouped the transcribed interactionsby their use of common epistemic criteria. The conversations in this paper were transcribed verbatim, and ouremphasis was on accuracy of content and sequence rather than on intonation or other markers.ResultsMeta-representational conversations within the nexus of disciplinesThroughout the week, teachers designed and built artistic data-driven lanterns that told an empirical story about ahydroponic garden in our working space. We observed practices and conversations that connected the arts,computing, biology, and physical sciences. The teachers’ interactions with one another were supported by theways in which the lanterns, garden, and technology provided a context for conversations about what to representand how to do so using the affordances of the tools at hand. These choices were based on aspects of each disciplinethat spanned aesthetics, scientific reasoning, and technical possibilities of the hardware and software, showingdifferent areas of expertise, entry points and knowledge sharing. Often, these discussions surfaced epistemiccriteria for making design choices. We present a sampling of these metarepresentational discussions below,selected to illustrate the ways in which teachers’ epistemic criteria were raised in design discussions.Communicative design criteriaTeachers often discussed the aesthetics of their lanterns in terms of communication with a viewer, addressingconcerns like how well the form corresponded to the data or the source of the data (the garden), how visuallyinteresting a lantern would be, and the relationship between aesthetic choices and how comprehensible a lanternwould be. Some teachers took the stance that the data should drive choices about the aesthetics of their lantern:Adam: The first thing I’m interested in is finding out is what the data is that we are going to measure.Kate: That’s going to help to pick the shape of the lantern, for sure.Other teachers in their group also emphasized correspondences between the visuality of their lantern and thedynamics of the data. Hannah, who, along with Maggie, worked with Adam and Kate, made the case for ensuringthat their lantern was visually interesting. Their design had two parts, a box on top that would show incoming data“marching like ants” each time a new data point was received, and the bottom would show a variety of data inthree hanging tube structures that would blink or change drastically in color when the values were not in the“normal” range. As they finalized this idea Hannah began to question the visual interestingness of the lantern:Hannah: [There is] going to be very little of this [lantern] that has any movement to it except for the boxwhich shows the data coming in. The rest of the stuff is just going to be on at a certain level untilsomething goes very wrong, until it's dying and then it will blink. If I'm a kid that makes me want to killthe plant to see it blink.Hannah realized that the lantern would always appear the same unless there were something wrong in the plants,making it, in her opinion, somewhat of a boring visualization. So she suggested that they modify the design sothat an animation was constantly happening, even if the garden was in normal ranges, and figuring out howstudents might create more dynamic visuals was a topic that she repeatedly returned to later. However, not allgroups seemed to value this correspondence principle; in the next section we describe how Bob and James seemedto make arbitrary decisions about how to connect the form and the data within their design.Besides being visually appealing, teachers discussed additional epistemic criteria that attended to thedistinct but related concerns of simplicity and comprehensibility. Simplicity was valued both in the parsimony ofthe data presented, as well as in regard to visual complexity. The following interaction illustrates the former:Bob: So these are three good [types of sensor data] is there anything else we want to add? And I thinkwe might want to keep it simple.ICLS 2018 Proceedings666© ISLSJames: I think those three, I think with those three would be the most simple we could make it.Simplicity of visual representation was sometimes discussed as a way to achieve comprehensibility: paint colors,patterns, structure shapes, or light colors were often chosen based on how easily a viewer would be able to “read”the lantern. Kate expressed a common sentiment of the teachers that overly complex visuals would confuse aviewer when she noted, “But not too much movement though, because then it gets muddied.” instead sheemphasized showing a clear, simple story. Other times this visual literacy shaped artistic choices in the paint orlighting patterns, such as when Adam alluded to his expertise in how the light and paint might interact “we couldkeep the paint pretty neutral because we are using pretty fine color [gradations in the] lights.” Thecomprehensibility criterion also affected the technical elements of one project. In the following example, Hannahexplains to her group why she thinks they should program the lights to be on or off rather than show brightness:Hannah: We might want to rather than adjusting the brightness of the LEDs we might want to turn moreLEDs off or on. Just from playing with the strip of LEDs you can’t tell that much. Like there is a hugerange, what I thought was going to be all the way on, medium and off was like medium and all the wayon are looking the same to me.We see here that Hannah noticed a limitation of the effective expressive utility of the lights, specifically that smallchanges in their brightness are often imperceptible to the human eye (human brightness perception is logarithmic),leading her to recommend a different representation that would still be able to communicate similar information.Informational design criteriaWithin discussions of science and lantern design, teachers mixed concerns for correspondence with other criteriaabout the need for content coverage and emphasis on “important” scientific information. For instance, one groupwanted to add physical motion to their lanterns. In a conversation about when they might use a computercontrolled fan to move paper streamers dangling from their lantern, the group discussed what scientific ideasmight be appropriate to represent that way, settling on photosynthesis and respiration:Maggie: I thought [turning the fan on] was a change in a process? Like when the plant does start toproduce O 2 rather than taking oxygen in. [the group looked to Kate to explain the biology]Adam: Do we have the sensitivity to record that?Kate: Not being a plant biologist and or even being a biologist, my understanding is that it is alwayssimultaneously happening. You know, we are pretty much constantly taking in oxygen and breathing outCO 2 and plants are pretty much constantly taking in CO 2 and putting out oxygen. That’s myunderstanding of it. Like at night they are not taking in the same kind of quantity, because they are notreally doing photosynthesis in the same way, so it could be a night versus day thing.Prior to this conversation the group was planning to have the streamers alert the viewer to any large change in anyof the data. In thinking about the technological capabilities of the tools in relation to the aesthetic goal of makingthe streamers move, the group delved into the science behind what scientific processes are dynamic enough toactually map onto the reaction they envisioned. Here the teachers seem to apply a principle of dynamiccorrespondence: dynamic representational elements should be associated with dynamic scientific phenomena.Although Kate was incorrect about the plant biology, the problem of what to do with the streamers offered anopportunity to the group to consider how representational practices could link science, measurement, and art.At other times, teachers used concerns about science curriculum content coverage to justify designchoices. They began their discussion by focusing on conveying scientific information through the physical shapeof their lantern (instantiating the correspondence criterion). They discussed using chemical structures such asbuckyballs and DNA, veered off into Viking helmets (tied to the school mascot), and finally settled on mountains.As they proceeded, each story and form they discussed was disjoint from the data and source of that data, thegarden, they would be visualizing. The following conversation occurred after they had decided on the structuralform of the mountains and were beginning to discuss what biological phenomena they might actually show:Bob: There could be gnomes… So there are mountain gnomes watching the sensors and that are goingto light up, they are going to turn on lights based on what is going on in the plants.[discussion of keeping the representation simple by only using three data points]ICLS 2018 Proceedings667© ISLSBob: But I think these three would be, so three peaks… we could also talk about ecosystems. That wouldbe good, so if you drive through the mountains, like certain areas are aspen covered, and other areasare pine, [some are] rocky, the top could be the like the white kind of tundra.James: That depends on how we paint it, one could be the aspen, one could be the pine…Bob: So ecosystems [lists ecosystems]James: I think if we took, like the three peaks, even if we can probably combine them… maybe the trees,and that is soil moisture, tundra and snow can be the light and rocky can be the temperature?Their depiction of mountain ecosystems enhances their lantern’s nominal capacity for content coverage, but thecontent they add is only loosely connected to observable phenomena within the garden. They seemed to make anarbitrary decision about which data will be shown where on their lantern. We see tensions here between theepistemic criteria of scientific content coverage with both the simplicity and correspondence criteria, as theirrepresentation introduces additional visual complexity in order to achieve content coverage, and the visualexpression of that content (e.g. snow, trees, rocks) bears no relationship to the particular data they are showing.We also saw repeated attention to a criterion that Adam called “scientifically interesting data.” Forinstance, Bob and James’s mountain sculpture design conversation continued as follows:James: We should be picking [data] on how many, you know how many peaks we are going to have.Three or four is probably a really good... If we wanna stick to three, and choose the most importantthree, light - definitely.Bob: Soil moisture like, did you water the plants.James: So light and soil moisture should be two that should definitely be there.While some of James and Bob’s choices about how to depict data seem arbitrary, at least one choice of what datato show considered the contextual needs of a human’s care for the garden (“did you water the plants?”).Transdisciplinary linkages between the nexus disciplinesEven as teachers applied disciplinary epistemic criteria within their metarepresentational work, they alsodeveloped transdisciplinary perspectives, drawing unifying connections beyond their individual disciplines(Stember, 1991). They talked with each other about the kinds of questions their disciplines lead them to pose, anddiscussed how they would apply the perspectives and practices of others’ to expand their own.Linking ideas and practices between science and artThough our presentation of some of the epistemic criteria above aligned with a single disciplinary area, teachers’discussions freely veered between fields. They routinely called attention to the differences between theirperspectives, and actively constructed connections between them that seemed to dissolve the distinctions betweentheir fields. For instance, the group below discusses how there is room for difference in implementation of LSbetween their classrooms, while still allowing for and valuing a convergence of disciplines.Adam: So, you said something about photosynthesis downstairs and it had me thinking about what’sthe transformation of light into energy. Or light into substance actually. Because it takes light andsomehow turns it into sugars through the plant’s process… So my questions there was how are thingsbeing transformed? Or how do we explore or demonstrate a transformation...Hannah: So it sounds like your big theme is transformation, where’s mine seems to be more abouttelling a story with data.Kate: For me it’s more along the line, you know, how exactly the plant processes and then representingthat. The data that we collect.Researcher: It is possible that we could all have different big questions and ways to introduce it.Kate: I think that they all kind of go together. At the same time. I mean this data often shows thesetransformations. And we can do it through the lens of plant processes.[conversation about whether to teach art history, art techniques and how to teach art]Adam: From my perspective I would push them into exploring the material in a deeper way, so wewould say, okay this is one way of doing it, but what else is the material capable of? How does the inkflow off a brush? How does it respond to being painted on a flat surface versus a dimensional surface.ICLS 2018 Proceedings668© ISLSHow does the object take up space? How does it look from all around? These are the sorts of… that Iwould have.Hannah: And I think that makes it so much deeper. Like if you are into understanding the materialsand the paint, the construction of that thing in a way, as supposed to it being sort of just anotherversion of a poster that tells you what to know about photosynthesis.From this conversation we see the value that Adam (art teacher) places on materials and capabilities. Thisconversation seems to influence Hannah (technology teacher) as she starts to connect the deeper understandingand manipulation of materials with better understanding of the science. Similarly, Kate (science teacher) initiallyfocused solely on the plant processes, but as the conversation progressed she saw all the big ideas as inherentlytied together. Through these discussions new types of questions teachers might ask their students or the way theyview their content could be reformulated in ways that would not be traditional for their specific classroom.Learning computing through attention to artistic and scientific criteriaAt times, their aesthetic or scientific aims motivated teachers to learn computing and electronics skills, such aswhen Adam identified the electronics skills he would need to learn to implement a design goal of the group, byasking how to “arrange the circuits”. In another episode, James and Bob wanted a string of lights to blink at aspeed proportional to light sensor data. They had an aesthetic desire to depict the garden data a certain way, butto do that James, who had never programmed before, needed to learn about variables, how to manipulate incomingdata, and how to create an animation of moving lights. In this episode, James programs and Bob helps him:James: So now if we set the light level [sets the incoming light data to a variable named “light level”]James: So now it will go faster if [the incoming light] is brighter? [finishes the program and they test it]Bob: So now let’s add more light. [physically shines a flashlight at the sensor; lantern responds byhaving a slower movement of the lights in a chasing motion]James: Right, so a longer pause because it’s a bigger number, right that makes sense, so it actuallyblinks slower.Their representational choice originally had been that more light would make the lights go faster, but because theyused a linear mapping from the sensor data to pause time, James found it had the inverse effect. The overlappingof art, science, and technology practices within this project allowed James to learn not just about the science, butcreated a meaningful context to learn programming from Bob in order to achieve the artistic representational endshe desired, and to observe the cause of an unintended relationship between data and their visual representation.Discussion and conclusionThrough this weeklong transdisciplinary teacher workshop, we examined how co-design of a nexus learningenvironment could support teachers’ explorations of representational practices and values from each other’sdisciplines. As they prototyped lanterns to visualize scientific data, they learned to use new representational forms(e.g. Nebuta lanterns, computer code) and tools (e.g. programmable micro-controllers).Metarepresentational competence has generally been valued in the literature as mastery over a set ofskills that support students’ science learning. In some of that work, students are invited to invent their ownrepresentations, before being pushed to work with canonical representations (diSessa et al., 1991). In contrast, ourco-design processes envisioned learning experiences that value students’ artistic representational inventions inand of themselves. Further, teachers’ lantern construction work functioned as a nexus learning environment forthem, with metarepresentational discourse being central to the teachers’ collaborations with one another. Inparticular, the question of how to present a meaningful representation of data was a critical thread that connecteddisciplinary practices and values from the arts, computing, and sciences. The project allowed for multiple waysto be recognized as expert within the teachers’ collaborations, illustrating how nexus learning environments cancreate room to value a more diverse set of skills and perspectives within STEM education, and change what“counts” as a science representation, or even as a way of “doing science” or “doing art.” We note that teachers’discussions of criteria for their lanterns seemed to address a larger terrain than prior research on epistemic criteriahas attended to; while we can conceive of the lanterns as models of biological phenomena (as in Pluta, Chinn, &Duncan, 2011), we, the researchers, and the teachers both valued elements of them that went beyond representingscientific processes (e.g., Bob and James’ gnomes, and the face of the “tree spirit” in our own lantern).A limitation of the workshop was that it only included one active art teacher, so each group did not haveas much direct access to the perspectives and practices of an expert art teacher; the metarepresentational talkwithin the most diverse group (with CS, art, and science teachers) seemed especially rich to us. Adam’s expertiseICLS 2018 Proceedings669© ISLSon art and art teaching was called upon by other groups. Additionally, groups tended to have only a single teacherfrom each discipline, so there were times when scientific misinformation went unchallenged, something less likelyto occur within mono-discipline co-design. An intriguing result of the group’s work together was the productionof several storylines with overlapping but divergent narratives. The teachers discussed values and practices fromeach other’s disciplines, noting affordances for their own work, which led to overlaps in storylines; but also notingchallenges due to differing contexts (e.g. schools, concepts) which led to differentiations in storylines. We willaddress these convergences and divergences during the co-design process in future papers.As this was a study of teachers’ collaborating in co-design, and not a classroom implementation, we donot yet know how this nexus approach would create opportunities for more inclusive student participation inscience. We are optimistic that the generousness with which the teachers embraced each other’s perspectiveswithin the co-design would translate to their classroom practices. The teachers who participated in this study arecurrently implementing LS in their classrooms; in a future paper we will examine how these implementationsrealize our aims of expanding the kinds of values and practices that can exist simultaneously in the classroom,and how doing so creates space for teachers to apply their disciplinary expertise in support of learning experiencesfor students that embrace a variety of identities, values, and practices for learning.ReferencesBang, M. & Medin, D. (2010). Cultural processes in science education: Supporting the navigation of multipleepistemologies. Science Education, 94(6), 1008-1026.Danish, J. A. & Enyedy, N. (2006). Negotiated representational mediators: How young children decide what toinclude in their science representations. Science Education, 91, 1-35.diSessa, A. A. (2001). Changing minds: Computers, learning, and literacy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.diSessa, A. A. (2004). Metarepresentation: Native competence and targets for instruction. Cognition andInstruction, 22(3), 293-331.diSessa, A. A., Hammer, D., Sherin, B., & Kolpakowski, T. (1991). Inventing graphing: Meta-representationalexpertise in children. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 10, 117-160.Greeno, J. G. & Hall, R. P. (1997). Practicing representation: Learning with and about representational forms.The Phi Delta Kappan, 78(5), 361-367.Guzdial, M. (2010). Does contextualized computing education help?. ACM Inroads, 1(4), 4-6.Hall, R. P. & Jurow, S. A. (2015). Changing concepts in activity: Descriptive and design studies of consequentiallearning in conceptual practice. Educational Psychologist, 50(3), 173-189.Hall, S., Stevens, R., & Torralba, T. (2002). Disrupting representational infrastructure in conversations acrossdisciplines. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 9(3), 179-210.Marallo, L. A. (2014). Integrating Art+STEM: An exploratory study of three science centers. Masters thesis.Retrieved from Washington ResearchWorks Archive.Next Generation Science Storylines. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.nextgenstorylines.org/Peppler, K. (2013). STEAM-powered computing education: Using e-textiles to integrate the arts and STEM.Computer, 46(9), 38-43.Peppler, K. & Wohlwend, K. (2017). Theorizing the nexus of STEAM practice. Arts Educ. Policy Review, 1-12.Pluta, W. J., Chinn, C. A. & Duncan, R. G. (2011). Learners’ epistemic criteria for good scientific models. Journalof Research in Science Teaching, 48(5), 486-511.Regalla, L. (2016). Chapter 17: Developing a maker mindset. In K. Peppler, E. Halverson, & Y. B. Kafai (Eds.),Makeology: Makerspaces as Learning Environments (pp. 257-272). New York: Routledge.Reiser, B. J. (2013). What professional development strategies are needed for successful implementation of theNext Generation Science Standards? Invitational Research Symposium on Science Assessment. 1-22.Searle, K. A., & Kafai, Y. B. (2015). Boys' Needlework: Understanding Gendered and Indigenous Perspectiveson Computing and Crafting with Electronic Textiles. In Proceedings of ICER'15 (pp. 31-39).Severance, S., Penuel, W. R., Sumner, T. & Leary, H. (2016). Organizing for teacher agency in curricular codesign. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25(4), 531-564.Stember, M. (1991). Advancing the social sciences through the interdisciplinary enterprise. The Social ScienceJournal, 28(1), 1-14.Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. M. (1997). Grounded theory in practice. Sage.Turkle, S. & Papert, S. (1992). Epistemological pluralism and the revaluation of the concrete. Journal ofMathematical Behavior, 11(1), 3-33.AcknowledgementsWe thank Oracle and the National Science Foundation (awards 1227530 and 1562040) for supporting this work.ICLS 2018 Proceedings670© ISLS