Enhancing Reflective Learning Experiences in Museums ThroughInteractive InstallationsHai Huang, School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, Malaysia Campus,khyx5hhh@nottingham.edu.myWei Hong Lo, School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, Malaysia Campus,lo_whng@yahoo.comKher Hui Ng, School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, Malaysia Campus,marina.ng@nottingham.edu.myTim Brailsford, School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, Jubilee Campus,tim.brailsford@nottingham.ac.ukClaire O’Malley, Department of Psychology, Durham University, claire.omalley@durham.ac.ukAbstract: In this study we examine the effect that several technological affordances haveupon the experiences of children while visiting a museum, focusing upon engagement,discussion and reflection. The museum is the Baba Nyonya Heritage Museum in Malacca,Malaysia. We created a number of public interactive installations designed to facilitate intercultural and inter-generational dialogues about cultural identity. The technology employedmixed and augmented reality techniques and gesture recognition to enable visitors to have amultisensory experience with the artefacts on display. Analysis of pre- to post-test knowledgebased surveys showed significant learning gains as a result of interacting with the exhibits.Surveys of visitors’ attitudes showed that they felt they had benefitted from the physicalinteractivity. Qualitative analysis of observational and video data showed that the differentinteraction techniques provided both benefits and challenges for interaction, which we reflectupon in the paper.Keywords: cultural learning, reflection, interactive installations, kinaesthetic learning, museum studiesIntroductionMuseums have existed for millennia, and throughout their long history their role in society has slowly evolved.They started out as private collections of curiosities, and for a long time their primary role was the cataloguingof artefacts. In more recent times public museums have developed with dual roles as a form of entertainmentand vehicles of education (Van Leeuwen et al., 2013). Now they are often viewed as tourist destinations and assuch are important contributors to local economies (Van Aalst & Boogaarts, 2002). Modern museums aresophisticated organisations that play a variety of roles in society. Increasingly, they are custodians of communitymemory and repositories of heritage (Andermann & Arnold-de Simine, 2012). Increasingly also, museums aredesigned to encourage visitors to create their own meaning by reflecting upon experiences that they have duringtheir visit and relating these to their life outside of the museum. This is why museums have been described as“socially-mediated meaning making environments” (Falk & Dierking, 2000).The technological revolution has had a major impact upon museums, and many of them make veryeffective use of a wide variety of interactive technologies. These augment physical artefacts with various typesof digital information to increase engagement and facilitate education. There is a widespread belief that manyvisitors no longer engage with static text, and need to be motivated by interaction (Koleva et al., 2009).However, there is a paradoxical concern that technologies that focus too much on learning goals can distractfrom the meaning making processes, which are the very things that the technology is trying to promote (Cosleyet al., 2008). The key issue is to consider how the technology promotes discussion and reflection in order tofacilitate meaning making. Several studies have focused on using technology to encourage visitors to reflectupon their experiences in museum visits. For example, Bampatzia et al. (2016) have used social media topromote discussions between visitors that are designed to stimulate reflection by thinking about the past. Acompletely different approach is described by Muntean et al. (2017), who have focused upon designing aninteractive tangible table-top in a cultural heritage museum in such a way that the tangible interactions supportvisitors’ experience and understanding of specific cultural values that the museum desires to impart. This type ofthinking in museum design is quite new, and there is as yet no received wisdom on how designers should createmuseum experiences that evoke deep, cultural reflections to help shape community identity.In this study we examine the effect that several technological affordances have upon the experiences ofchildren while visiting a museum, focusing upon engagement, discussion and reflection. The museum inICLS 2018 Proceedings776© ISLSquestion is the Baba Nyonya Heritage Museum in Malacca, Malaysia (http://babanyonyamuseum.com). TheBaba Nyonya (also known as Peranakan) is a unique cultural group. The Peranakan people are the descendantsof Chinese traders who originally came to the Malay archipelago (an area that now encompasses parts ofMalaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and Thailand) between the 15th and 17th centuries (West, 2010). These,invariably male, traders married local women of Malay, Indian, Thai or Portuguese descent. Some of thesefamilies became hugely wealthy and they developed their own distinct fusion culture, complete with traditions,food, clothing and many artefacts. The descendants of Peranakans who live in modern Malaysia usually identifythemselves as the Baba Nyonya. During the late 19th and early 20th Century (e.g. the British colonial era) theBaba Nyonya families were at the height of their wealth and influence, and so there also came to be a verystrong British influence upon this fusion culture. Modern Malaysia is a young country that contains one of themost culturally diverse societies in the world. The population consists of three major ethnic/cultural/religiousgroups (identified as the Islamic Malays, the Buddhist or Christian Chinese and the Hindu Indians) as well asmany smaller groups. Because of the youth of the country and this cultural diversity, many young Malaysiansstruggle with a sense of national identity. The fusion culture of the Baba Nyonya cuts to the heart of this. Uponvisiting the museum, all Malaysians (and indeed many other nationals) do see a lot that is familiar in BabaNyonya culture.What we are trying to achieve with this research is to encourage young Malaysians to reflect upon thisfamiliarity, and also the uniqueness of Baba Nyonya culture. We have created several public interactiveinstallations in the museum that are designed to facilitate inter-cultural and inter-generational dialogues aboutcultural identity. The hope is that these dialogues will help children to consider some important and fundamentalquestions about what it means to be a Malaysian. In times of increasing ethnic tensions throughout the world,the role of museums as repositories of heritage is ever more important to help people understand culturalsimilarities and appreciate cultural differences. We are attempting to build upon modern thinking in museumabout the use of tangible interfaces to help promote this sort of reflection.Related workThe use of digital technologies is becoming widespread in museum and other cultural heritage settings.Examples include the use of augmented reality (AR) (Pedersen et al., 2017) and games (Anderson et al., 2010)to support cultural heritage learning and to enhance museum visits. The digitalization of works of art andhistorical artefacts using modern technologies such as tangible user interfaces (TUI) and Internet of Things (IoT)further allow visitors to interact with either original or copies of cultural heritage artefacts physically,cognitively and emotionally using their senses (Wakkary et al., 2009). For example, in the MeSch project,visitors can use smart replicas – copies of physical artefacts augmented with RFID tags to trigger and playassociated multimedia stories about the artefacts (Marshall et al., 2016). The aim of this research is to explorenew technological approaches that go beyond supporting cultural heritage learning to evoke deep, culturalreflections as well.Designing for reflectionReflection is a key component of successful inquiry based learning (Quintana et al., 2004). There have beenseveral examples of how technology can be used to support reflection in learning and teaching (e.g., Lin et al.,1999; Fleck & Fitzpatrick, 2009). Fleck and Fitzpatrick have synthesized the literature on reflection into aframework consisting of five different levels: ranging from (mere) revisiting of experiences through description,revisiting with explanation, exploring relationships, transformation of earlier perspectives, and criticalconsideration of wider perspectives (Fleck & Fitzpatrick, 2010). There are many definitions and theories ofreflective learning, and we do not set out to synthesise this literature, nor espouse a particular approach. We do,however, take as our starting point the important role of social interaction in supporting reflection on experience(Lin et al., 1999), particularly in young children, and the significant role of the (family) group as the socialcontext for learning in visits to museums and science centres (Falk & Dierking, 2013). Our design approach,therefore, has been to provide visitor experiences that support social interaction within groups of visitors andwith exhibits that provoke discussion and reflection.Designers have demonstrated an increased interest in designing for reflection (Sengers et al., 2005;Baumer, 2015). In the domain of cultural heritage, Skydsgaard et al. (2016) investigated how four designprinciples (curiosity, challenge, narratives and participation) facilitate reflection and discussion among visitorsin a museum exhibition. For example, narratives were found to be effective in facilitating personal reflection,while participation which includes physical interaction with exhibits facilitated the sharing of ideas and feelingsbetween visitors. A reflective design for an art museum focused on under-designed aspects of the visitorexperience so as to highlight the presence of unknown others in an ambient way (Boehner et al., 2005).ICLS 2018 Proceedings777© ISLSGiaccardi and Palen (2008) focused on preserving natural heritage by connecting a local community and theirland through locative and tangible media. Similar to the present research, CrossCult (http://www.crosscult.eu) isa project that aims to change the way people view history, but using a different platform – that of socialnetworks. Visitors are able to share cultural experiences with social network friends and discuss with each otheron museum themes and reflection topics. So far, many of the papers reviewed here have focused on exploringpossible approaches to reflective design in cultural settings, but little evidence has been provided so far tosuggest their effectiveness in engaging visitors in reflective thoughts (Baumer et al., 2014). In this project, weattempt this by developing three distinctive interactive installations and compare them to understand how best todesign for cultural heritage learning as well as reflection.Context and design of the interactive exhibitsThis project is carried out as part of a research collaboration with Baba Nyonya Heritage Museum. It is locatedin the old district of the World UNESCO area of Malacca town. The project is in line with the museum’s visionof bridging communities to Malaysia’s history through the Baba Nyonya culture. Initial ethnographic studies,information gathering and brainstorming sessions were conducted involving museum curators in a participatorydesign process over a 6 month period. We found that current personal guided museum tours lack interactionbetween visitors and museum contents, and fail to cultivate or sustain the cultural learning interest of children.As a huge number of visitors to the museum are school and family groups with children, we decided to designinteractive exhibits that could become part of a self-guided tour for families and children.We were interested in exploring how multisensory and physical interactions facilitate cultural learningand reflection among visitors. Three interactive exhibits were developed, supporting varying levels ofmultisensory and physical user interactions (from least to most):1) An interactive mural that allows visitors to listen to and interact with crowdsourced life stories.2) A goldsmith simulator that allows visitors to simulate the process of making Peranakan jewelry. Earlycraftsmen would use coins, mainly English sterling and US dollars, incorporated into pendants whosedesigns were further influenced by local ethnicities (e.g., Indian or Chinese-influenced).3) An interactive stone grinder (known as ‘Batu Boh’) that allows visitors to engage in the process of‘kuih’ making. Kuih are bite-sized snacks or cakes and are usually made from rice or glutinous rice.The Batu Boh interactive exhibit highlights the many kuih native to Malay, Indian and Chinese culturethat have been improvised by the Baba Nyonyas. Four different kuih recipes could be chosen.The historical and cultural topics and learning content were chosen to highlight the rich diversity in thePeranakan culture (eastern and western influences, and different Peranakan ethnicities).Technological approach•Interactive mural - The interactive mural allows visitors to listen and connect to life storiescrowdsourced among the Baba Nyonyas. They can submit their audio stories online which areautomatically downloaded to the interactive mural. Touch sensitive points, created using conductivepaint, were connected to a Raspberry Pi 3 and PiCap adapter. The physical board is complemented withdigital projections, allowing background images to be changed based on the selected Peranakanethnicity (see Figure 1).•Goldsmith simulator – The goldsmith simulator uses Leap Motion, a hand tracking technology to helpusers understand the jewelry making process by allowing them to take on the role of an early goldsmith.To start, visitors use gestures to select a pendant frame and a coin in the virtual world, made with Unity.In order to solder them together, users need to pump on a physical bellows to start the solder ‘fire’. Atthe end, visitors have an opportunity to photograph themselves wearing the soldered pendant as adigital souvenir (see Figure 2).•Interactive Batu Boh grinder – The interactive Batu Boh is designed as a replica of an old stonegrinder, historically used by Nyonyas to grind and mix spices and other ingredients. By embedding itwith sensor technologies, users can insert a tagged ingredient card and turn the handle to simulate theprocess of kuih making, while at the same time listening to an audio recording of an old chef recollecting historical and cultural stories associated with the ingredient. The process is repeated until allingredients have been ground, and a fragrance of the kuih is released along with a physical capsule(containing a sticker of the kuih) as a physical souvenir (see Figure 3).ICLS 2018 Proceedings778© ISLSFigure 1. Interactive Mural and user interactions.Figure 2. Goldsmith simulator using motion detection.Figure 3. Batu Boh Design, Final Appearance and User InteractionMethodThe user trial was carried out in the Baba Nyonya Heritage Museum on March 19th and 20th, 2017, and involvedgroups comprising families with children. We employed surveys, user observations and video analyses as theevaluation methods. All participants filled in consent forms agreeing to participate in the study and to be videorecorded. They also completed a pre-test survey to provide their demographic details (e.g., age, gender,education level). The pre- and post-test domain knowledge surveys consisted of 11 items designed to testparticipants’ knowledge of the Baba Nyonya culture that formed the basis of the culture-related exhibits.Question items were different for the pre- and post-test instruments but tapped the same knowledge content.Learning outcomes were measured using changes in performance from pre- to post-experience. Participants’attitudes towards the experience were surveyed after the visit, employing a 7-point scale to indicate agreementwith the six statements (see results section). Video data were collected by filming every tour and weresupplemented by observational notes taken by researchers. A self-guided map was provided to each group. Ourprediction was that the visitors would be more engaged in learning and reflection when the interactive exhibitsupports more physical and multi-sensory interaction.ParticipantsThe user trial involved 10 groups, with 32 participants in total. The group size ranged between 3-8 people. Allparticipants were visitors to the museum and from Malaysia. Three groups were residents of Malacca. In theresident group, two groups had visited the museum before. The individual participant age ranged from 9 to 47years (mean (M) = 19.97 yrs; standard deviation (SD) = 13.33 yrs). There were 23 children under age 18 (M =11.82 yrs; SD = 2.42 yrs) and 9 adults above the age of 18 (M = 36.8 yrs; SD = 10.46 yrs). A single letteridentifier naming approach was adopted for each group (e.g., H), followed by a number for each participant inthe group (e.g., H2).ResultsLearning outcomesThe post-test data from the knowledge based survey were positively skewed (z = 2.202) and both the pre- andpost-test scores deviated significantly from normal (pre: D (30) = 0.241, p < .001; post: D (30) = 0.203, p < .01).Therefore, a Wilcoxon test was used to compare pre- to post-test scores. Post-test scores were significantlyhigher at post-test (M = 8.00) than at pre-test (M = 7.00, T = 355, p < .001, r = 0.52).ICLS 2018 Proceedings779© ISLSUser attitudesTable 1: Percentage agreement with the statements about the experience (% participants giving a rating of 4-7on a 7-point scale, from strongly disagree to strongly agree, with a neutral midpoint)Statements1.2.3.4.5.6.The exhibit provides a good learning experience of the BabaNyonya cultureThe exhibit encourages discussions with othersThe exhibit helps me reflect/think more about my own cultureThe exhibit made me want to learn more about the Baba NyonyacultureThe physical interaction with the exhibit enhanced my learningexperienceI feel that I have gained more knowledge after using the exhibitGoldsmithsimulatorBatuBohInteractivemural736366836675705066686858727778846674Qualitative analysis of sociocultural reflectionsInteractive Batu Boh grinderThe design of the interactive Batu Boh exhibit showed some success in encouraging discussion and reflectionamong family members. Through the video analysis, we observed a boy T1, having finished using theinteractive Batu Boh, proceed to examine an original Batu Boh artefact within the exhibit area and engage inconversation with his parents in the background (see Figure 4). There were also instances of historicalreflections between participants and other museum visitors who were observing the user interactions. Forexample, upon seeing a girl (H1) interacting with the interactive Batu Boh, a visitor (A) asked “What’s this?”.The girl’s mother (H2) explained. Then visitor A said “Oh, put [inaudible] to the hole, then...[inaudible]. Letchildren experience the kind of life in the olden days”. Her father (H3) then remarked, “How long does it needto grind? Maybe grind four more times? Let them experience life”. H2 agreed with H3 by saying, “Yes,experience life”. The use of the interactive Batu Boh also encouraged inter-generational dialogue where a father(Y2) was seen to explain to his child “If you grind this way, the kuih’s flour will come out. You can cook it...Isaw this one before…In my grandma’s house”. Another example showed a girl (O1), who was grinding the BatuBoh, ask, “Can it make dim sum?” (see Figure 5). Other group members started to discuss this possibility withher mother (O2) asking, “Is the thing coming out dry stuff or wet like soya bean?” Her father (O3) also began toask “Can rice flour also be ground?”. In the end, another woman friend (O4) replied, “Yes, you can put the riceflour in there” while pointing at an old Batu Boh. This discussion helped O1 learn that rice flour is an ingredientfor making dim sum and can be ground using the Batu Boh.Goldsmith simulatorWith respect to user interactions at the goldsmith exhibit, we observed many occasions where group membersworked collaboratively to carry out jewelry making tasks. We found that participants often missed hearing theaudio instructions as they concentrated on carrying out the task as it required controlled gestures. Typically,other group members would help repeat the audio instruction to guide the participant through the tasks. In thisexhibit, the use of the bellows by participants often triggered discussion about the soldering task. For example,when other members in group C saw how the bellows were used to start the solder fire, C2 (father) said“Emm…This is soldering…You can see it is used to solder things….Did you see him solder the money?”. ThenC3 (mother) asked “Are you sure that is money?”, to which C2 replied “That’s a coin…You didn’t see?”.Interactive muralIn the user observation involving the interactive mural exhibit, most participants did not notice it right awayuntil it was pointed out. Almost instantly, all participants would become curious about the technology, and lookbehind the board to find out how it works. It was observed that children usually tended to lose interest in theaudio stories before they end, suggesting that the current content needs to be modified to suit younger children.Role of physical and digital souvenirsMost participants were seen to look pleased to receive a physical capsule as souvenir at the end of theirinteraction with the Batu Boh. Some children tried to repeat the kuih making to collect all recipe stickers or triedICLS 2018 Proceedings780© ISLSto exchange them. For example, when girl A1 finished her turn, she asked girl A2 “Can you give me yours? Iwant to exchange”. In group F, when the girl F1 received a capsule, she looked at its sticker content andremarked, “I know, this in Chinese is called [kuih’s name in Chinese]”. In comparison, the digital souvenir(digital photo of user wearing virtual pendant) did not solicit much discussion. Some children did not want theirphotos to be taken, while others kept re-taking photos without focusing much on the pendant they made.Role of smellAs to the use of fragrance of kuih being emitted when the kuih making was completed at the Batu Boh exhibit,many participants would notice the smell and asked “What’s that smell?”, “Do you smell something?”, “Why dowe need perfume?” or commented “The smell is nice”.Figure 4. Group discussing the old Batu Boh artefact.Figure 5. A group of users engaged in reflectivediscussion.DiscussionThe results of the pre- to post-test comparison of tests of knowledge about Baba Nyonya culture showed thatthere was a significant learning gain as a result of engagement with the exhibits. However, a drawback to thispreliminary study is that there was no control group with which to compare any learning gains from visitingwithout the technology augmentation. Nonetheless, the results are encouraging. Participants also seemed to feelthat they gained some knowledge of Baba Nyonya culture as a result of the experience (Q1 and Q6 in Table 1).Whilst they felt that the goldsmith and Batu Boh exhibits encouraged discussion (Q2), there was less agreementabout this for the Interactive Mural (the least interactive of the exhibits). This is also reflected in the views aboutthe effects of physical interaction on learning (Q5). Here there was less agreement about the Interactive Muralcompared with the other two exhibits.These experimental installations were designed to provide a range of different levels of physicalinteraction to evaluate how this kinaesthetic experience influenced engagement, discussion and reflection andultimately learning. We also included a multisensory experience which included smell, to evaluate whether ornot that would trigger discussions. In terms of the kinaesthetics, the interactive mural is the least physical (it hasa touch board, but other than that it is a conventional computer interface). The goldsmith simulator is morephysical, requiring fine gestures to control the interface and a real bellows to activate the soldering. The BatuBoh is the most physical. There is no screen – the computer-generated output consists entirely of voice andsmell, and the user interaction involves inserting a card, turning a handle and collecting a physical souvenir.With the interactive mural, there was some engagement but not much more than would be expectedfrom a conventional museum exhibit. Some children were curious about the technology (as were some of theirparents), but we observed very little reflection about the contents. The goldsmith station was much morephysical. The simulation allowed children to select a coin and a frame – using gesture recognition to pick themup, and a real bellows to operate the soldering. The fine motor control required to operate the simulator didcause problems for some younger children, but it also sparked a good deal of interaction and cooperationbetween children. Sometimes children offered advice to their peers, sometimes they split the physical tasks (forexample with one child operating the bellow and another the gestures). There was some discussion about thecoins, but little evidence of reflection and certainly no evidence of higher levels of reflection. Any reflection thatwas observed would fall in the categories of description and explanation (cf. Fleck & Fitzpatrick, 2010). Theinteractive Batu Boh was by far the most engaging installation. This was a large object that required a lot ofphysical manipulation. When children first walked in to the room they were often immediately attracted to it.This inspired a good deal of discussion between children, their friends and the parents about the nature of boththe artefact and the task. There were also some examples of higher level reflection exploring relationships. AICLS 2018 Proceedings781© ISLSgood example of this was a girl who, unprompted, made a connection with the virtual recipe she was makingand modern dim sum.After the successful completion of the goldsmith and Batu Boh simulations, the children were givensouvenirs – digital in the case of the goldsmith and physical in the case of the Batu Boh. In the goldsmithsimulator, the children made a virtual pendant and at the end they could photograph themselves “wearing” this.In the Batu Boh simulator, they were given a coloured capsule containing a sticker representing the food theyhad created. These souvenirs were certainly popular with the children and very engaging, however there waslittle evidence of them supporting reflection. What discussion there was tended to be more about the souveniritself than its cultural significance. With the digital souvenir from the goldsmith simulator, the children were farmore interested in the photographs of themselves than the pendant they had made. (It should be noted, though,that some children were shy and unwilling to be photographed.) With the stickers produced by the Batu Bohsimulator, some children were quite competitive and played the game multiple times to try to get the completeset of stickers. Some traded them with each other – again trying to get a complete set.The smell produced by the Batu Boh simulator did not in any way seem to facilitate either engagementor reflection. The children certainly noticed it, and sometimes commented upon it but these comments hadnothing to do with the simulation or its context – they were along the lines of “what’s the smell?”This study has provided some evidence to suggest that increasing the kinaesthesic aspects of mixedreality installations can promote reflection. It can certainly promote engagement and is popular with children. Itis possible that there is a relationship between the level of kinaesthesic engagement and the level of reflection.However, we don’t have enough data at present to be able to be certain whether this is the case. This is an areain need of further research with larger numbers of children.ConclusionsThe aim of this research was to design and evaluate the effectiveness of mixed reality technologies inaugmenting the visitor experience in a museum and cultural heritage context. Our design was based on thepotential of interactive installations to enhance the kinaesthetic and multisensory experience of hands-onengagement with artefacts that are normally ‘hands-off’, in order to promote deeper engagement, discussion andreflection in small groups of visitors, especially children. We have presented some evidence that this wasachieved. We have shown that the experience resulted in significant learning gains in terms of knowledge of thecontent of the exhibits. Visitors liked the experience, and felt that they had learned from it – in particular thoseaspects involving physical interaction. We also set out in this research to provide a context in which Malaysianvisitors (as well as others from an Asian / South East Asian context) might be supported in learning about andreflecting on their (multi)cultural identity. Our qualitative analyses showed instances of how the experienceswith the exhibits enhanced discussion and sharing of Peranakan culture within the groups of visitors, especiallyintergenerational exchanges. Finally, the research was an exploration of the affordances of different interactiontechniques in supporting reflective learning through intra-group discussions. In comparing between the differentinteraction techniques, it seems that the goldsmith and Batu Boh exhibits, each of which involved a greateramount of physical engagement, were the more successful in terms of generating moments of reflectivelearning. These exhibits also afforded more collaborative interactions, where several members of the groupcould participate at once. These insights have been observed in other studies. However, where we feel we havemade an original contribution is in showing how relatively simple interaction techniques can create a rich intergenerational cultural learning experience, embedded in the original museum setting (rather than being separatedfrom it) and that brings to life exhibits that are usually hands-off and experienced at a distance.ReferencesAndermann, J. & Arnold-de Simine, S. (2012). Introduction: memory, community and the newmuseum. Theory, Culture & Society, 29(1), 3-13.Anderson, E., McLoughlin, L., Liarokapis, F., Feters, Petridis, P. & de Freitas, S. (2010). Developing seriousgames for cultural heritage: a state-of-the-art review. Virtual Reality, 14, 255-275.Bampatzia, S., Antoniou, A., Lepouras, G., Vasilakis, C. & Wallace, M. (2016). Using social media to stimulatehistory reflection in cultural heritage. In 11th International Workshop on Semantic and Social MediaAdaptation and Personalization (SMAP) (pp. 89-92). IEEE.Baumer, E. P., Khovanskaya, V., Matthews, M., Reynolds, L., Schwanda Sosik, V. & Gay, G. (2014).Reviewing reflection: on the use of reflection in interactive system design. In Proceedings of the 2014conference on Designing Interactive Systems (pp. 93-102). ACM.ICLS 2018 Proceedings782© ISLSBaumer, E. P. (2015). Reflective informatics: conceptual dimensions for designing technologies of reflection.In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 585-594).ACM.Benford, S., Giannachi, G., Koleva, B. & Rodden, T. (2009). From interaction to trajectories: designingcoherent journeys through user experiences. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on HumanFactors in Computing Systems (pp. 709-718). ACM.Boehner, K., Sengers, P., & Gay, G. (2005). Affective presence in museums: ambient systems for creativeexpression. Digital Creativity, 16(2), 79-89.Cosley, D., Lewenstein, J., Herman, A., Holloway, J., Baxter, J., Nomura, S., Boehner, K. & Gay, G. (2008).ArtLinks: fostering social awareness and reflection in museums. In Proceedings of the SIGCHIConference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 403-412). ACM.Falk, J. H. & Dierking, L. D. (2000). Learning from Museums: Visitor Experiences and the Making of Meaning.Altamira Press.Falk, J.H. & Dierking, L.D. (2013). The Museum Experience Revisited. Left Coast Press.Fleck, R. & Fitzpatrick, G. (2009). Teachers’ and tutors’ social reflection around SenseCamimages. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 67(12), 1024-1036.Fleck, R. & Fitzpatrick, G. (2010). Reflecting on reflection: framing a design landscape. In Proceedings of the22nd Conference of the Computer-Human Interaction Special Interest Group of Australia onComputer-Human Interaction (pp. 216-223). ACM.Giaccardi, E. & Palen, L. (2008). The social production of heritage through cross‐media interaction: makingplace for place‐making. International Journal of Heritage Studies, 14(3), 281-297.Koleva, B., Egglestone, S. R., Schnädelbach, H., Glover, K., Greenhalgh, C., Rodden, T. & Dade-Robertson, M.(2009). Supporting the creation of hybrid museum experiences. In Proceedings of the SIGCHIConference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1973-1982). ACM.Lamberty, K. K. & Kolodner, J. L. (2005). Camera talk: Making the camera a partial participant. In Proceedingsof the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 839-848). ACM.Lin, X., Hmelo, C., Kinzer, C. K. & Secules, T. J. (1999). Designing technology to supportreflection. Educational Technology Research and Development, 47(3), 43-62.Marsh, T. (2016). Slow serious games, interactions and play: Designing for positive and serious experience andreflection. Entertainment Computing, 14, 45-53.Marshall, M. T., Dulake, N., Ciolfi, L., Duranti, D., Kockelkorn, H. & Petrelli, D. (2016). Using tangible smartreplicas as controls for an interactive museum exhibition. In Proceedings of the Tenth InternationalConference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (pp. 159-167). ACM.Muntean, R., Antle, A. N., Matkin, B., Hennessy, K., Rowley, S. & Wilson, J. (2017). Designing cultural valuesinto interaction. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in ComputingSystems (pp. 6062-6074). ACM.Pedersen, S., Gale, N., Mirza-Babaei, P. & Reid, S. (2017). More than meets the eye: the benefits of augmentedreality and holographic displays for digital heritage. Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage,10(2), Article 11. ACM.Quintana, C., Reiser, B.J., Davis, E.A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R.G., Kyza, E., Edelson, D. & Soloway,E. (2004). A scaffolding design framework for software to support science inquiry. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 13(3), 337-386.Sengers, P., Boehner, K., David, S. & Kaye, J. J. (2005). Reflective design. In Proceedings of the 4th DecennialConference on Critical Computing: Between Sense and Sensibility (pp. 49-58). ACM.Skydsgaard, M. A., Møller Andersen, H. & King, H. (2016). Designing museum exhibits that facilitate visitorreflection and discussion. Museum Management and Curatorship, 31(1), 48-68.Van Aalst, I. & Boogaarts, I. (2002). From museum to mass entertainment: The evolution of the role ofmuseums in cities. European Urban and Regional Studies, 9(3), 195-209.Van Leeuwen, T., Kriegsman, L., van Tol, J. & Schokkenbroek, J. (2013). The changing role of museums in theglobal scientific landscape. Journal of Scientometric Research, 2(2), 137.Wakkary, R., Hatala, M., Muise, K., Tanenbaum, K., Corness, G., Mohabbati, B. & Budd, J. (2009). Kurio: amuseum guide for families. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Tangible andEmbedded Interaction (pp. 215-222). ACM.West, B. A. (2010). Encyclopedia of the Peoples of Asia and Oceania. Infobase Publishing.AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank the Baba Nyonya Heritage Museum for their collaboration in this research project.ICLS 2018 Proceedings783© ISLS