Fostering Collaborative Learning Through Knowledge BuildingAmong Students With Low Academic AchievementYuqin Yang, The University of Hong Kong, yqyang@hku.hkJan van Aalst, The University of Hong Kong, vanaalst@hku.hkCarol K. K. Chan, The University of Hong Kong, ckkchan@hku.hkAbstract: This study investigated whether students with low achievement were capable tocollectively advance their online discourse in a knowledge-building environment. 37 studentswith low achievement from a 9th-grade Visual Arts course participated in the study. Weanalyzed students’ online discourse. Findings indicated that students were able to collectivelyadvance the community’s discourse as they built on each others’ ideas, generated theories,questions and metacognitive statements in a supportive knowledge-building environmentaugmented by reflective assessment. The study’s findings have important implications for thedesign of technology-rich environments, and shed light on how teachers can use them to helplearners to engage in productive collaborative inquiry.IntroductionMuch research in the learning sciences studies computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL), which ofteninvolves metacognition (Stahl, 2002). However, little attention has been given to how students with lowachievement perform in CSCL—e.g., students who score in the lowest third on central examinations.In Hong Kong, students are very competitive and achievement oriented, even in primary schools.Secondary schools are classified in three bands—Band 1 (highest) through Band 3 (lowest)—based onachievement on a government examination, in Grade 6, of the majority of its students. Most students in Band-3schools are low academic achievers, and are not adequately engaged with their schoolwork (Shen, Lee, & Tsai,2007). Students with low achievement are often found to have limited metacognitive skill; they exhibit low interestand negative attitudes toward their learning. Helping students like these to engage in collaborative inquiry and tobenefit from it is a great challenge for educators.Recognizing these challenges, this study designed a knowledge-building environment augmented byreflective assessment which has been shown positively affected students’ learning and performance. The studyaimed to investigate whether students with low achievement were able to collectively improve their onlinediscourse in a knowledge-building environment. This study was part of a larger study that investigated whetherstudents with low achievement were capable to use reflective assessment to improve their attempt at knowledgebuilding (Scardmalia, 2002), using an assessment tool, the Knowledge Connections Analyzer (KCA) (van Aalstet al., 2012). The following research questions were investigated: (1) What was the nature of the knowledgebuilding discourse? (2) To what extent did students improve their discourse?MethodsResearch context and participantsThe study was conducted in a Band-3 school in Hong Kong; it was actually at the 10th percentile. The participantswere 37 students in a 9th-grade class taking a visual-arts course; they were taught in Chinese. Students madeinquiry into the topics “What is art?” and “How to evaluate art?” over five months, one lesson per week. Theteacher had much experience teaching the visual arts, had taken a postgraduate course on knowledge building,and had used knowledge building in the classroom for approximately 8 years. The participating students had noprevious experience with knowledge building.Pedagogical designThe teacher used the following pedagogical process to familiarize the students with knowledge building, asdescribed elsewhere in detail by van Aalst and Chan (2012); this process was adapted to the present context basedon findings from a preliminary study: (1) Helping students to develop inquiry, collaborative and metacognitivecapabilities; (2) Deepening problem-centered inquiry in Knowledge Forum; and (3) Developing deep domainunderstanding and metacognitive skills through reflective assessment. After working on Knowledge Forum tocontribute a reasonable number of notes, students were guided to reflect on their notes by performing reflectiveassessment collectively and individually primarily with KCA data. To support productive reflection on the KCAdata, students were provided with KCA prompt sheets that were both content-related and metacognitive, andICLS 2016 Proceedings819© ISLScorresponded to each of the four questions in the KCA. Around each question of the KCA, the teacher and thefirst researcher, with the help of the KCA prompt sheets, created opportunities for student reflection. Small groupsof student were asked to reflect on the KCA data, to identify problems in their online discourse, and to makefurther plans to address the problems.Analysis and resultsData source in this study were computer notes students posted on Knowledge Forum. We analyzed the KnowledgeForum database using the inquiry thread analysis, followed by analysis of interactions and contributions withinthese inquiry threads. Then we report the results of characteristics of students’ notes in three stages (Stage 1, Stage2 and Stage 3), to evaluate the advancement of the online discourse.Inquiry thread analysisAll computer notes except three unfinished notes (400 notes) created during 2.5 months were put into inquirythreads, yielding 18 inquiry threads. An inquiry thread is a sequence of notes that aim to address the same principalproblem (Zhang et al., 2007). To check coding reliability of inquiry thread analysis, two raters independentlycompleted the task on 40% of the notes. The inter-rater reliability was .80 (Cohen’s kappa). Some threads involvedmost of the students as authors (e.g., #1, #3, #4, #7, #8, and #13), whereas others involved only a small numberof authors; this suggests that some problems attract more attention from the community than others (Table 1).Qualitative analysis of student interaction and contribution within inquiry threadsTo characterize the students’ interactions within and contributions to the discourse at a more granular level, weused a coding framework to code the notes in each inquiry thread. The development of the coding frameworkinvolved an iterative coding process of theory- and data-driven approaches. The coding schemes included threemain categories of questions, ideas and community, and corresponding subcategories, and drew upon theoreticalframeworks for social, cognitive and meta-cognitive processes of knowledge construction (van Aalst, 2009; Zhanget al., 2007). The coding framework and coding examples can be accessed online(http://kbc2.edu.hku.hk/ICLS2016coding.pdf). Two raters independently coded the notes from three inquirythreads (n = 120, 30%). The inter-rater reliability was .78 for questions, .78 for ideas, .79 for knowledge quality,and .77 for community (Cohen’s kappas).Results from coding the discourse in the inquiry threads are shown in Table 1. We selected 14 largeinquiry threads and present the numbers of questions and ideas in them. Inquiry threads defined as large includedmore than ten notes. Generally, the results demonstrated in Table 1 are consistent with the classification of theinquiry threads as a whole and suggest that students created many new ideas and were involved in explanationoriented discourse. For example, students wrote more notes with explanations than notes with simple claims(approximate 145 and 113, respectively, for most metacognitive statement were elaborated explanations). Thisresult indicates that students engaged in a deep—and not superficial— knowledge building process. At the sametime questions and statements that were more explanatory appeared in those threads that concerned explanatoryissues.Table 1 also shows that the students asked many metacognitive questions (53 notes), and contributed areasonable number of metacognitive statements that included meta-discourse (48 notes) to reflect on progress andhighlighted promising ideas or problems for further inquiry. All these data indicate that students invested mucheffort into reviewing and reflecting on the online discourse. At the same time, metacognitive questions andmetacognitive statement appear more in threads that concerned explanatory issues. We further categorizedstudents’ contributions to their community. As shown in Table 1, 222 notes were classified as depending inquiry,and 40 notes were synthesizing notes. These results indicate a high frequency of responses to others’ questionsand ideas, most of which focused on conceptual advancement and at creasing a knowledge space of value to boththe community as a whole and individuals.ICLS 2016 Proceedings820© ISLSICLS 2016 Proceedings821© ISLSQuestioning, ideation, metacognition and rise-aboveWe further analyzed the characteristics of the students’ notes in 14 large inquiry threads in three stages, each stagehaving an equivalent proportion of notes, to demonstrate the advancement of discourse. As the goal was to showthe advancement of discourse, comparison analysis was conducted on explanation-seeking questions(questioning), explanations (ideation), metacognitive questions and statements (metacognition), and rise-above(synthesis). Table 2 shows the results for the three stages and compared them with the aggregated results for eachstage. The frequency distributions for Stage 1 and Stage 2 differed significantly: χ2(df = 4, N = 109) = 15.60, ϕ =0.38. The effect size was moderate to large. The frequency distributions also differed significantly for Stage 2 andStage 3 three, χ2(df = 4, N = 167) = 31.56, ϕ = 0.44; a medium to large effect; and for Stage 1 and Stage 3, χ2(df= 4, N = 142) = 53.00, ϕ = 0.61; that was a large effect size. The results indicate primarily that the studentscontributed more explanation-seeking questions in Stage 1 compared with any other stages, and that that theywere mostly engaged in reflecting on and regulating their inquiry, and synthesizing their notes during Stage 3.ConclusionsThis study investigated whether students with low achievement were capable to collectively improve their attemptat knowledge building. During the knowledge-building process, students with low-achievement in this class, in asupportive knowledge-building environment, were indeed able to assume high-level responsibility to collectivelyaccomplish knowledge-building discourse. They engaged in productive interactions and progressively advancedideas in the communal space. In addition, the pedagogical design is accessible to students with low achievement.The design incorporated three components: (a) periodic tasks that promoted collaboration and reflection, (b)opportunities for reflecting assessment data collaboratively, and (c) the framing of discourse improvement ascollective responsibility. Although this pedagogical design was developed for engaging low achieving students tocollectively advance knowledge-building discourse, we believe that this design would have important implicationfor the design of technology-rich environments to support learners and shed light on how teachers can use themto help learners to gain benefits from collaborative inquiry.ReferencesScardmalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In B. Smith (Ed.),Liberal education in a knowledge society (pp. 67-98). Chicago, IL: Open Court.Shen, P. D., Lee, T. H., & Tsai, C. W. (2007). Applying Web-enabled problem-based learning and self-regulatedlearning to enhance computing skills of Taiwan’s vocational students: A quasi-experimental study of ashort-term module. Electronic Journal of e-Learning, 5(2), 147-156.Stahl, G. (2002). Computer support for collaborative learning: Foundation for a CSCL community. Mahwah, NJ:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.van Aalst, J. (2009). Distinguishing knowledge sharing, construction, and creation discourses. InternationalJournal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(3), 259-288.van Aalst, J., Chan, C., Tian, S. W., Teplovs, C., Chan, Y. Y., & Wan, W.-S. (2012). The knowledge connectionsanalyzer. In J. van Aalst, K. Thompson, M. J. Jacobson & P. Reimann (Eds.), The future of learning:Proceedings of the 10th international conference of the learning sciences (ICLS 2012) – Volume 2, shortpapers, symposia, and abstracts (pp. 361-365). Sydney, Australia: ISLS.van Aalst, J., & Chan, C. K. K. (2012). Empowering students as knowledge builders. In L. Rowan & C. Bigum(Eds.), Future proofing education: Transformative approaches to new technologies and student diversityin future oriented classrooms (pp. 85-103). Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer.Zhang, J., Scardamalia, M., Lamon, M., Messina, R., & Reeve, R. (2007). Socio-cognitive dynamics of knowledgebuilding in the work of 9-and 10-year-olds. Educational Technology Research and Development, 55(2),117-145.AcknowledgmentsThe authors would like to thank the teacher and students for their participation in the study. This research waspartly was supported by a grant to the second and third authors from the University Grants Committee (Grant No.752508H).ICLS 2016 Proceedings822© ISLS