Transgressing Ideologies of Collaborative Learning and WorkingSpacesJarek Sierschynski, University of Washington Tacoma, jareks@uw.eduScott Spaulding, University of Washington Seattle, scott2@uw.eduAbstract: This paper offers a theoretical contribution to CSCL by foregrounding the notion ofplace as elaborated in humanistic and cultural geography (Creswell, 1996), where place isdefined by ideology and practices that produce, monitor and reproduce its boundaries.Examining the notion of place as both an element in CSCL tool design and a level of analysisfor CSCL (Stahl, 2012), we discuss its role in the emergent design and development of aCSCL application for teachers, university students and researchers. The discussion in thispaper serves as a first step in articulating how (1) CSCL tools can transgress and thus questionofficial learning and working places and (2) how transgression can foster re-ordering of placesand their practices.IntroductionThe following paper offers a theoretical discussion surrounding the iterative design and development process ofa computer-supported collaborative learning and teaching application for educators. It makes a contributiontowards building a theory for CSCL (Stahl, 2004) by adding an additional “plane” or unit of analysis to thosethat have been traditionally examined in the context of CSCL (Stahl, 2012). In particular, we are theorizing thedesign of CSCL for its less explored capacity to transgress, i.e., cross boundaries and ideologies of physicalplaces and their practices. To do that, we foreground the concept of place as elaborated in humanistic andcultural geography (Cresswell, 1996; Tuan, 2001). These conceptions stress place not only as a deeply complexhuman element, but also as “the basis for human interaction” (Cresswell, 2015). According to Cresswell (1996),place is,produced by practice that adheres to (ideological) beliefs about what is the appropriate thingto do. But place reproduces the beliefs that produce it in a way that makes them appearnatural, self-evident, and commonsense. We are silent in libraries, and by being silent inlibraries we contribute to the continuation of silence. Thus places are active forces in thereproduction of norms—in the definition of appropriate practice. Place constitutes our beliefsabout what is appropriate as much as it is constituted by them.Thus, place as an additional level of analysis or theoretical lens, allows us to examine and questionestablished (normalized) structures that rely on collaboration. Our thinking behind the design of a softwareapplication that relies on collaboration between university and school provides the background for thisdiscussion. Moreover, we emphasize and theorize place not only as a unit of analysis, but also simultaneously asan important design element of CSCL tools that seeks to link structurally and ideologically separate places. Inour case, over the years of development, we have discovered that the iterative design involving researchers,programmers, teachers and students, pushed our thinking about technology integration, design, and collaborativelearning across places and their designated practices. As a first step, instantiated by this paper, we arearticulating the design process and thinking involved in transgressing places of learning and working.SignificanceNotions of place and relationships between places where learning and collaboration occurs tend to be lessvisible aspects of CSCL tool design. Perhaps, even less visible are the links between online environments andplaces such as schools or universities. Again, the concept of place used here is not simply defined by anarchitectural structure or location, rather by practices that engage with and produce certain values (i.e.,ideologies) through them. Our goal is to apply the notion of place as a “way of seeing” (Cresswell, 2015) tworelated places and their practices (i.e., places and their ideologies), namely teacher preparation programs atuniversities and schools. We suggest that such a move can open up and influence the design process whenexamined in terms of both existing and absent connections between places. In our case, the design of oursoftware application has been informed by places and their practices deemed appropriate for learning and thoseplaces typically associated with the notion of work. Ultimately, for us, this division of learning and workingCSCL 2017 Proceedings637© ISLSplaces represented a recurring problem hindering the successful use of the software (see next section). Itfocused our attention on distributed learning across time and place and the need for ongoing access tocollaborative spaces that transgress traditional understandings of learning and working. Consequently, westarted conceptualizing collaboration and design at the level of place, i.e., between ideologies associated withinstitutions that engage in training and working. Such a theoretical move parallels views of learning as a sociallyand culturally distributed process amongst individuals, practices, tools and environments, as distributedexpertise and cognition (Barron & Bell, 2016; Brown et al., 1993; Hutchins, 1995a,b; Nasir, Roesebery, Warren& Lee, 2006; Rogoff, 1995; Pea, 1993; Stahl, Koschman & Suthers, 2014), while highlighting ideologicaldimensions of the connection and interaction between places. Hence, the design of our CSCL tool involvesthinking about what defines places, about established beliefs and practices that give and maintain their meaning,about their boundaries and their transgression.The CSCL applicationOver the last 6 years we developed a software application, ibestt (Integrating Behavior Support and TeamTechnology), to support educators in elementary and middle school settings. ibestt was built to assist teachers incollaboratively addressing challenging behaviors in their classrooms. Given inherent complexities withinclassroom environments, the software design had to account for both rigor and flexibility within the online andoffline environments it bridges. Although, ibestt helped educators implement behavior supports to some extent,teachers and school teams were often not successful, which ultimately lead us to a design that grapples with thenotion of place. Our analysis of ibestt use over the past several years is consistent with decades of findings in theschool-based behavior intervention research literature: many educators struggle with the complexity of thesupport process and the applied behavior expertise that is required to provide appropriate and positive behaviorinterventions. To address these challenges, a new iteration of the application includes asynchronous onlinecoaching interactions between team members and between behavior experts and novices. Simultaneously, webegan to hypothesize that team success is influenced by the separation of training, learning and workingpractices in the context of teacher education, disrupting expertise development and collaborations. This led us toconsider place as a contributing element in collaborative learning. As a result, we are presently working onusing ibestt to connect university teacher-preparation programs with school districts and their communities. Thisplace-oriented design will enable ibestt to become a tool that accompanies teacher candidates through theireducation into their work environments, simultaneously bridging ideological and physical boundaries betweentraditionally separate learning spaces, i.e., between learning, training and work. The emerging software designframes teacher preparation as a non-linear but continuous process, as an apprenticeship, conflating learningplaces and those associated with professional practice.ConclusionsWe wanted to take a first step to emphasize and articulate place as a design element in CSCL, in particular thedesign of computer technologies to question places and their practices. There are different reasons for theabsence of place in discussions of CSCL. Most of the time it is a matter of a different focus, yet places and theirideologies are often invisible and unquestioned, i.e., they reproduce themselves through the practices that givethem meaning (Cresswell, 1996). What makes place a distinct design element worthy of a separate discussion inthe context of developing a theory of CSCL (Stahl, 2004) is that it provides a different entry point for discussinghigher-level interactions that contribute or hinder learning. Hence we suggest that the interactions orcollaborations occur at a level of place and its ideology, in our example, between university teacher educationprograms and schools. Places are defined by practices, their reinforcement and reproduction. Hence connectionsbetween places link and transgress practices and ideologies. What is of particular interest to us are theinteractions and thinking that is made possible by CSCL software, between places in which learning andworking takes place. The design process was informed by the interactions between researchers, designers andpracticing teachers, i.e., interactions between educators and their particular places. These multiple-year longexchanges, data analysis, and iterative design revisions lead us to the current conclusion that places and theirboundaries impact learning and working, that the attention to and transgression of these boundaries can be anessential part of the design and solution process.What we suggest here is that there is value in attending to place as an element that shapes theboundaries between definitions of learning and working. The often presumed independence of spatial, local orsociopolitical constraints associated with CSCL practices and online environments contribute further to theobscurity of place as an ideological construct. As we are developing the application, we are starting toconceptualize the relationships between learning, working and place. Undoubtedly, CSCL is not only aboutsharing knowledge and collaborative practices (Stahl & Hesse, 2009), but also about questioning, reconstructingCSCL 2017 Proceedings638© ISLSand sharing places where learning and work takes place. Consequently, the developing software designdiscussed here is not only an attempt to share but to shape infrastructure of these spaces. Connections betweenplaces traditionally associated with education involve not only close attention to social aspects of learning andinteraction, but also to politics and ideology of place as a design element.ReferencesBarron, B., & Bell, P. (2016). Learning environments in and out of school. In L. Corno & E. M. Anderman(Eds.), Handbook of Educational Psychology. Washington, DC: APA.Brown, A. L., Ash, D., Rutherford, M., Nakagawa, K., Gordon, A. & Campione, J. C. (1993). Distributedexpertise in the classroom. Teoksessa G. Salomon (toim.) Distributed cognitions: Psychological andeducational considerations (pp. 188–228). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Cresswell, T. (1996). In Place/out of Place: Geography, Ideology, and Transgression. Minneapolis, MN:University of Minnesota Press.Cresswell, T. (2014). Place: An Introduction. John Wiley & Sons.Hutchins, E. (1995a). Cognition in the Wild. MIT press.Hutchins, E. (1995b). How a cockpit remembers its speeds. Cognitive science, 19(3), 265-288.Nasir, N. I. S., Rosebery, A. S., Warren, B., & Lee, C. D. (2006). Learning as a cultural process: Achievingequity through diversity. The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences, 489-504.Pea, R. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributedcognitions: Psychological and educational considerations (pp. 47-87). New York: CambridgeUniversity Press.Rogoff, B. (2003). The cultural nature of human development. Oxford University Press.Stahl, G. (2004). Building collaborative knowing: Elements of a social theory of CSCL. In J. W. Strijbos, P. A.Kirschner, & R. L. Martens, (Eds.), What we know about CSCL and implementing it in highereducation (pp. 53–86). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer.Stahl, G., & Hesse, F. (2009). Practice perspectives in CSCL. International Journal of Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning, 4(2), 109-114.Stahl, G., Koschmann, T., & Suthers, D. (2006). Computer-supported collaborative learning: An historicalperspective. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 409–426).Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Stahl, G. (2012). Traversing planes of learning. International Journal of Computer-Supported CollaborativeLearning, 7(4), 467-473.Tuan, Y. (1977). Space and place: The perspective of experience. Minneapolis, MN: University of MinnesotaPress.CSCL 2017 Proceedings639© ISLS