Concrete Definition of Beneficial Collaborative DialoguesMichelene T. H. Chi, Mary Lou Fulton Teachers College, Arizona State University, Michelene.Chi@asu.eduAbstract: Collaborative learning is often superior to individual learning, but not consistentlyso. To understand why not, we applied the ICAP theory of cognitive engagement to define andoperationalize various collaborative dialogue patterns and identified the co-generative patternas the optimal one for maximizing learning. We used the definitions to code dialogues fromdata collected in our prior studies and show that dyads with higher co-generative scores learnedmore than dyads with lower co-generative scores. This suggests that collaborative learning ismore effective if a certain dialogue pattern occurs.Interacting with a peer through dialogues often promotes greater learning than learning alone (Dillenbourg, Baker,Blaye, & O’Malley, 1995; Perret-Clermont, Perret, & Bell, 1991), but not always (e.g., Barron, 2003). Althoughnumerous reasons have been proposed over the last few decades for why collaboration is beneficial for learning(such as that learning is necessarily a social process, collaboration involves opportunities to resolve conflicts,etc.), few efforts have attempted to understand why collaborative learning sometimes fails to exceed the benefitof learning individually. We propose that specifying concrete operational definitions for dialogue patterns mayexplain when collaborative learning is not always beneficial. Concrete definitions may also pave the way forpractitioners (e.g. teachers & instructors) to know how to enable and foster better collaborative learning.The ICAP TheoryThe collaborative dialogue pattern that is optimal for learning can be defined by applying the ICAP theory ofcognitive engagement (Chi, 2009). ICAP classifies how students engage with instructional materials into fourmodes of activities: Students can pay attention to instruction and receive instructional information but do nothingelse with it (e.g., just listen to a lecture, or watch a video, or read a text). By not manipulating or producinganything else with the instructional materials, this can be labeled the Passive mode of engagement. Alternatively,students can manipulate the instructional materials in some ways, such as underlining some of the text sentencesor copying notes from a power point lecture, without incorporating any additional information. This is labeled theActive mode of engagement. Students can also engage in the Constructive mode, which is to generate informationbeyond the information provided in the instructional materials. For example, instead of copying the content of ateacher’s power point slides, a student can generate additional information that was not provided in the powerpoint slides, such as justification for a solution step to a problem, or posing a question about the solution step.Finally, students can engage with learning materials with a peer, and each peer can not only generate informationbeyond what was presented in the learning materials, but each peer can generate information by addressing andextending the partner’s contributions, thus engaging in a co-generative way in the Interactive mode. Basically,the mode in which a student engages can be determined operationally simply by comparing the student’scontributions (e.g. outputs or products) with the content materials provided in the instruction. So for the fourmodes, students’ contributions are either: none (attentive/Passive), similar in content (manipulative/Active), inaddition to content (generative/Constructive), or extend beyond content and partner’s contributions (cogenerative/Interactive).ICAP posits that the mode in which students engage with instructional materials determines how muchthey learn or how deeply they learn. The Interactive/co-generative mode is the best, followed next by theConstructive/generative mode, then the Active/manipulative mode, and finally the Passive/attentive mode whichis the least effective for learning. Thus, the order is I>C>A>P. This hypothesis about the amount or depth oflearning as a function of engagement mode arises from the cognitive processes underlying each mode of activity.For example, being generative/Constructive means that students are making inferences, whereas beingmanipulative/Active means that students are merely activating prior knowledge and storing new information, butnot generating many inferences. The predictions of the hypothesis are supported by hundreds of studies in theliterature (Chi & Wylie, 2014).Applying ICAP to define collaborative dialoguesThe definitions of the four I, C, A, P modes can be applied to collaborative dialogues to determine the mode inwhich each partner of a collaborative dyad contributes. For example, the speaker is simply payingattention/Passive if her contribution is “Uh huh” or “ok”. However, if the speaker responds to her partner’scontribution with a paraphrase, a repetition, or an agreement type of response, then the speaker is contributing ina manipulative/Active way because the speaker is not providing any additional information. On the other hand, ifICLS 2018 Proceedings1445© ISLSthe speaker contributes an idea that differs from what was said before but does not extend the partner’scontribution, then the speaker is responding in a generative/Constructive way. Finally, if the speaker responds bygenerating ideas that extend and build on the partner’s contribution, then the speaker is being cogenerative/Interactive. Thus, there are a variety of dialogue patterns, based on how each speaker contributes, suchas both partners can be Active, or one partner is Constructive and the other partner is Active or Passive, or partnerscan both be Constructive in parallel, building on their own thinking but not building on the partner’s thinking, orthey can both be truly Interactive/co-generative in that they each build upon and extend their partner’s thinking.There are potentially at minimum nine dialogue patterns, assuming partners cannot both be Passive-Passive. Ourclaim is that only one dialogue pattern, the co-generative one, can ensure that the benefit of collaborative learningexceeds learning individually.Using data collected in Menekse, Stump, Krause, and Chi (2013), we coded multi-turn episodes ofdialogues in answering each question from 24 pairs of college engineering students. Co-generative dialoguepatterns received a score of 3; dialogue patterns in which only one partner was generative and the other partnerwas manipulative received a score of 2; and if the participants were both manipulative, or manipulative-attentive,or generative-attentive, then the dialogue pattern received a score of 1. The result of our coding showed that thesix pairs with the highest interaction scores learned significantly better than the six pairs with the lowestinteraction scores, based on an ANCOVA comparing post-test scores while controlling for pre-test scores, F(1,11) = 18.30, p < .01. A similar analysis was carried out for data collected in another study (Muldner, Lam, & Chi,2014), in which 40 undergraduates worked in pairs to complete a diffusion worksheet while watching instructionalvideos. The dialogues were coded in the same way. We again found that the six higher scored pairs hadsignificantly greater learning gains than the six lower scored pairs, comparing adjusted post-test scores, F(1, 11)= 5.31, p = .05. Figure 1 plots the results from both studies, showing the same pattern of significantly higherlearning gains when students collaborate in a co-generative way.ConclusionAdjusted posttest meansApplying ICAP’s definition of modes of engagement to define interactive dialogue patterns allows us tooperationally specify which dialogue pattern is optimal for collaborative learning. Our definition and codingresults suggest that collaborative learning can exceed individual learning when dyads interact in a mutually-andreciprocally co-generative way.16 pairs with lowestinteraction scores0.50Menekse et al. (2013) studyMuldner et al. (2014) studyFigure 1. Adjusted post-test means of data coded from two separate studies. Error bars represent +/- 2 SE.ReferencesBarron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307-359.Chi, M.T.H. (2009). Active-constructive-interactive: A conceptual framework for differentiating learningactivities. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1, 73-105.Chi, M.T.H., & Wylie, R. (2014). The ICAP framework: Linking cognitive engagement to active learningoutcomes. Educational Psychologist, 49, 219-243.Dillenbourg, P., Baker, M., Blaye, A., & O’Malley, C. (1996). The evolution of research on collaborative learning.In E. Spada & P. Reiman (Eds.), Learning in humans and machine: Towards an interdisciplinarylearning science (pp. 189-211). Oxford, UK: Elsevier.Menekse, M., Stump, G., Krause, S. & Chi, M.T.H. (2013). Differentiated overt learning activities for effectiveinstruction in engineering classrooms. Journal of Engineering Education, 102, 346-374.Muldner, K., Lam, R., & Chi, M.T.H. (2013). Comparing learning from observing and from human tutoring.Journal of Educational Psychology, 106, 69-85.Perret-Clermont, A. N., Peret, J. F., & Bell, N. (1991). The social construction of meaning and cognitive activityin elementary school children. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Leving, & S. D. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives onsocially-shared cognition (pp. 41-62). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.AcknowledgementsThe author is grateful for funding provided by the Institute of Education Sciences (Grant No. R305A150432).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1446© ISLS