How Do Multilingual Learners Support One Another’s ScienceLearning and Participation?Mavreen Rose S. Tuvilla, Purdue University, mtuvilla@purdue.eduCasey E. Wright, Purdue University, wrigh401@purdue.eduMinjung Ryu, Purdue University, mryu@purdue.eduShannon M. Daniel, Vanderbilt University, shannon.m.daniel@vanderbilt.eduAbstract: As superdiversity becomes the new mainstream in U.S. schools, how multilinguallearners support one another’s learning and participation warrants better understanding. Weanalyzed interactions of four dyads of multilingual Burmese youth in an afterschool scienceprogram as they made predictions about region-specific climate changes in the next 100 years.Findings suggest they used multiple languages and various communicative modes to create anequitable learning environment.IntroductionChanging patterns of migration across the world create superdiverse learning environments to which learnersbring diverse languages, ethnicities, religions, race, and cultural practices (Gogolin, 2011). In the U.S., where ourresearch is situated, superdiversity is the new mainstream (Enright, 2011). In our study, we engaged resettledrefugee youth from Burmese backgrounds in collaborative scientific practices in a community-based afterschoolprogram. These practices include asking questions, analyzing data, and arguing from evidence. In schools,opportunities for engagement can be limited for multilingual students (often labeled English Learners or ELs)when they are marginalized or are not supported in navigating multilingual collaborative contexts to achievespecific communicative and sense-making goals. In our afterschool program, we sought to provide a learningenvironment in which youth with varying levels of proficiency in English and multiple indigenous languages ofBurma (e.g., Hakha, Falam, Zophei) agentively pursue their own learning and participation opportunities whilesupporting their peers’ learning. Our study aims to contribute knowledge and provide implications that promoteequitable participation and learning in superdiverse learning settings. To that end, this paper addresses thequestion: How do multilingual learners support one another’s science learning and participation?MethodsWe implemented a year-long afterschool program (1.5 hours per session; 22 sessions) to engage youth in learningabout climate change, and collected data in the form of video-recordings, field notes, screencasts of computer use,and artifact images. In this paper, we analyzed data from Session 17 in which participants formed pairs, conductedonline research, and created a poster to answer the question: “What will the earth be like 100 years from now ifclimate change continues?” We micro-analyzed video-recordings drawing on principles of video analysis (Derryet al., 2010) from an ethnographic perspective. We selected events for close analysis and transcribed them tocapture utterances, gesture, body posture, gaze, computer use, organization of artifacts and use of space (Norris,2004). Exchanges spoken in participants’ L1 were translated into English by an external translator. Wecollectively wrote analytic notes of the microanalysis of each event and created a matrix to generate themesthrough constant comparison (Lincoln & Guba, 1985) between events within and across focal four dyads.FindingsClose analysis of the four focal dyads showed that the youth facilitated one another’s access to the learning taskand collaborative sense-making by using multiple languages and various communicative modes (gesture, gaze,proxemics, images, etc.); thereby leading to a more equitable learning environment. An excerpt from one dyad,Thiri (T) and Da Zin (DZ), illustrates how they negotiated between their differing ideas on what to researchregarding the impacts of climate change in Sydney, Australia. A facilitator, MJR asks T and DZ about what theyknow about the impacts of climate change. DZ forwards the idea that farmers “couldn’t farm” because of thescarcity of water. Building on DZ’s idea, T asks whether farming is a common practice in Sydney. MJR urgesthem to find out and walks away. The following conversation then ensues. Utterances in italics are spoken inHakha (T and DZ’s L1). Annotations of non-verbals are in ((Bold)).010203DZ: So, why don’t we write about farmers that we just talked about?T: Do they also do farming in Sydney Australia?DZ: In what she [MJR] saidICLS 2018 Proceedings1761© ISLS04050607080910T: Uhuh ((T angles her body towards DZ))DZ: We will write the effect of climate change first, and then with Sydney like, you know we will make that effectconnect ((DZ makes an open palm gesture on the poster paper)) with Sydney. Like with Sydney, does this happenin there as well?T: Ahhhh. Do you want to do it like that?DZ: I guess it is like that. In what she [MJR] just said, we will find climate effects and then see if that also affectsSydney and what it's going to be like after in 100 years, I guess it’s something like thatT: Uhuh ((in agreement)) I was thinking we should just like find out how it is like you know in Sydney right now((T taps on the keyboard. DZ leans in towards T)) and then uhm the problems that it's facing ((T taps on theposter paper)) and then after the problems we can write out what will happenDZ: Hmmm. Yeah, we can do thatT: Yeah or what you said was all of the climate change problems ((T makes an open palm gesture to DZ)) and thenlike similarity ((T makes a circular gesture over the poster paper)) to the Sydney Australia problems. Which onedo you wanna do?T and DZ’s flexible use of Hakha and English throughout the exchange along with the gestures thatpunctuate their explications (Turns 4,5,8, and 10) has allowed them to engage in exploratory talk wherein theyexplored one another’s ideas critically and constructively (Mercer, 2000). Through translanguaging (García &Wei, 2014), they negotiated their approach to the science problem without constraining language use to Englishonly. They considered their general knowledge of climate change (Turn 7), the specific regional considerations(Turn 2), and negotiated research directions related to their task (Turns 5, 7, 8 and 10). More specifically, at thebeginning of this episode, T evaluates and challenges DZ’s idea of farming by suggesting a criterion of relevance– whether farming is also done in Sydney (Turn 2). DZ’s recognition of this underlying criterion of relevancecompels her to reframe her idea (Turn 5). This then led to T considering DZ’s idea (Turn 6) and offering a newidea (Turn 8). In addition, the two girls fostered collaboration by being attentive, open to one another’s ideas, andsharing cognitive authority. They showed this by soliciting and taking up each other’s perspectives (Turns 1, 2,5, 6, and 10), adjusting the angles of their body postures (Turns 4, 8, and 10), and sharing of tools relevant to thetask (poster paper and laptop; Turns 8 and 10). In this sense, equitable participation is achieved throughtranslanguaging, sharing of cognitive authority, openness to one another’s ideas, and mutual engagement in thetask.ConclusionsWe explored the ways multilingual youth engaged in collaborative science practices and supported one another’sscience learning and participation. Through the use of multiple languages and communicative modes beyond thespoken word, they were able to leverage their sense-making practices to further their own and their peer’sunderstandings. The facilitators created space for equitable learning to take place by affording youth theopportunity to use multiple languages. Open-ended, peer-led tasks enabled multilingual youth to share and valueone another’s scientific contributions in ways that a teacher may not be able to access. By propelling one another’sscience learning, the youth created a more equitable environment.ReferencesDerry, S.J., Pea, R.D., Barron, B., Engle, R.A., Erickson, F., Goldman, R., ... & Sherin, B.L. (2010). Conductingvideo research in the learning sciences: Guidance on selection, analysis, technology, and ethics. TheJournal of the Learning Sciences, 19(1), 3-53.Enright, K.A. (2011). Language and literacy for a new mainstream. American Educational Research Journal,48(1), 80-118.García O., Wei L. (2014) Translanguaging and education. In Translanguaging: Language, bilingualism andeducation. London: Palgrave Macmillan.Gogolin, I. (2011). The challenge of super diversity for education in Europe. Education Inquiry, 2(2), 239-249.Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry (Vol. 75). Sage.Mercer, N. (2000). Words and minds: How we use language to think together. London: Routledge.Norris, S. (2004). Analyzing multimodal interaction: A methodological framework. Routledge.AcknowledgmentThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. (NSF-DRL#1612688).ICLS 2018 Proceedings1762© ISLS