Unpacking Social Factors in Mechanistic Reasoning(Or, Why a Wealthy Person is Not Exactly Like a Grey Squirrel)Arthur Hjorth, Center for Connected Learning and Computer-Based Modeling, Northwestern University,arthur.hjorth@u.northwestern.eduChristina Krist, Northwestern University, ckrist@u.northwestern.eduAbstract: Mechanistic reasoning in social domains is understudied. We speculate that the waysthat students reason about social phenomena share enough similarities with how they reasonabout physical and life sciences that we can use existing work on mechanistic reasoning tocharacterize students’ explanations of social phenomena. We apply an existing framework foranalyzing student reasoning about life sciences to students’ explanations of a socialphenomenon relating to urban planning. In comparing these analyses, we propose a componentof student reasoning that may be specific to reasoning about social phenomena: social factorbacking. We show that incorporating this component into the existing framework providers afuller account of our data. Finally, we discuss why we think this element could be importantfor future studies of students’ mechanistic reasoning about social phenomena.Keywords: mechanistic reasoning, science education, social science educationIntroductionMechanistic reasoning, or reasoning systematically through how and why underlying factors and relationshipsgive rise to a phenomenon (Machamer, Darden, & Craver, 2000), is a valuable form of human thinking. It allowspeople to systematically explain and predict events in contexts as wide-ranging as workplace and organizationaldynamics (e.g., Senge & Sterman, 1992), traffic jams (e.g., Wilensky & Resnick, 1999) or fluctuations ofpopulations in ecosystems (e.g., Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006). This type of reasoning is increasingly becoming afocus of schooling across disciplines. In particular, science education reforms such as the Next Generation ScienceStandards call for integrating causal, mechanistic thinking as a crosscutting concept in science instruction (NGSSLead States, 2013). Along a similar vein, the NCSS recently released The College, Career, and Civic Life (C3)Framework for Social Studies State Standards (NCSS, 2013), proposing new K-12 social studies in which theyemphasize ‘complex causal reasoning’. Although we have some ideas about what mechanistic reasoning lookslike and how to support it in science classrooms (e.g., Russ et al., 2008; Schwarz et al., 2009), research hasstrikingly tended to separate out reasoning involving people as “social” or “socio-cultural” reasoning that isdistinct from—or even in opposition to—“scientific” reasoning based in logic and mechanism (e.g., Lee, 2012;Pedrett & Nazir, 2011). As such, we know very little about what mechanistic reasoning looks like in contexts thatinclude people as humanized components of systems, or how students’ reasoning about those mechanismscompares to mechanistic reasoning about natural phenomena (i.e., not involving humans). As we work to preparestudents to solve complex, multifaceted problems in a world where the social and natural spheres are intimatelyinterconnected, we need to better understand what mechanistic reasoning is and what it involves in order to designcurricula and instruction that better supports students in this kind of crosscutting mechanistic reasoning. Here, weaim to characterize students’ mechanistic accounts of natural and social phenomena using the same framework inorder to identify similarities and differences that contribute to a general theoretical model for mechanisticreasoning and suggest important analytical differences that can help bridge our understanding of mechanism fromthe natural sciences to the social sciences.What is a mechanism in the natural sciences? In a synthesis of work from the philosophy of science,Machamer, Darden, and Craver (2000) define a mechanism as: “entities and activities organized such that theyare productive of regular changes from start or set-up to finish or termination conditions” (p. 3). Russ et al. (2008)apply this definition to identify elements mechanistic reasoning in student discourse, including identifying entities,or “the things that play roles in producing the phenomenon” (p. 14); and a set of elements that together are about“characterizing entities”: identifying activities, properties, and/or organization of those entities. For example, astudent seeking to explain how and why they could smell popcorn inside their classroom when it was being poppedin the teacher’s lounge could identify that both the popcorn odor and the air are made of molecules that areconstantly moving and bouncing off each other. They might also reason that the popcorn odor molecules arewarmer than the air molecules and therefore have more energy. Though not yet a full causal account, this activityof identifying and characterizing the entities involved in producing a phenomenon are a critical part of reasoningthrough a mechanism.ICLS 2016 Proceedings894© ISLSHowever, the nature of the entities that students characterize, and subsequently use to reason with, maydiffer across science contexts. In the physical sciences theses entities are often individual agents like molecules.But in the life and earth sciences the units that students identify and reason with are more often relationshipsbetween entities, properties, and behaviors, such as “grey squirrels can eat acorns” (Krist, Schwarz, & Reiser,under review). It is these relationships that are most productive for students to think with as they account forphenomena occurring in complex environments such as an ecosystems (c.f., Vattam et al., 2011). We followAuthor 2 et al., and use the term “factor” to describe the unit that students identify and subsequently use to reason,whether that factor be an individual agent or a relationship. Due to these observed variations in science contexts,we wondered if we would see new types of factors and reasoning about social phenomena. Because socialphenomena often involve values and decisions, we speculated that the way students identify and characterizefactors in this domain may have additional dimensions related to human decision-making.In this paper, we seek to explore the nature of the factors that students identify and how theycharacterize them as they construct mechanistic accounts of social science phenomena. We do so by analyzingcollege students’ responses to a question about the relationship between income and commute times. Ourpreliminary analyses show that students do in fact identify and unpack factors as an important part of theirmechanistic reasoning. However, students also reason through how the entities in the system (people) makedecisions that as part of their explanation of the phenomenon. We discuss how this affects both our theoreticalunderstanding of mechanistic reasoning more generally and how we can better support students’ use of thisdimension in their mechanistic reasoning across domains.MethodsTo examine elements of students’ mechanistic reasoning in a social science context, we used written responsesfrom undergraduate students during a unit on urban planning. During the unit, students interacted with a NetLogo(Wilensky, 1999) model that allowed them to build a city by drawing in various types of zones (residential,industrial, etc.) and constructing major highways and public transit lines. While running the model, they couldmonitor several variables, including average commute time, average income, and distribution of income levelsacross the city. After the unit, we gave students a post-test that included the question, “Can you explain how ahigh-income person’s income might make their commute time longer than a low-income person’s?” Studentswrote short answer responses that were between 1 and 4 sentences long.To analyze these data, we utilized Krist et al.’s framework for differentiating the relative complexities ofstudents’ mechanistic accounts. We draw on their notion of a “factor” as whatever unit students identified andused to reason through a phenomenon. We speculated that students would likely identify complex factors, suchas entity-property relationships. We also noted where students “unpacked” those factors, or reasoned through howthe implications of those relationships over space and/or time gave rise to the observed phenomenon (Krist et al.,under review). We highlight four student responses that exhibited varying levels of mechanistic reasoning in orderto show contrasting cases (Table 1). In the following section, we account for our analysis of these four responses,discuss similarities and differences between the two datasets, and articulate the degree to which the analyticalframework can help us make sense of them.FindingsIn the first response, SS1 identifies two factors; that low-income people live in the city, and that wealthy peoplelive in more spread out suburbs. However, while both of these factors are important parts of a full explanation,SS1 does not unpack and say why these two factors would lead to differences in commute times for the twopopulation groups. In the second response, we see that SS2 identifies two factors as well. One is the same as SS1,and the other is different: that higher income people typically live in suburbs, and that they work downtown.Additionally, this student unpacks the relationship between these two factors, and explains that the reason whyhigher income people have higher commute times is that these two factors combined lead to longer drives. Finally,there is a probabilistic element in SS2’s explicitly says that high income people typically live in the suburbs. Wesee this response as similar to a response to the life sciences question in which a student claims that red squirrelstypically cannot eat acorns (though it is always possible that some of them might have randomly mutated in a waythat allows them to do so). So far so good, and we can see that applying Author 2 et al.’s framework helps usidentify elements in student responses.However, we see something different in SS3’s response that we think might be related to the probabilisticelement in SS2’s response. SS3 identifies the same two factors as SS2 (that wealthy people can live in suburbs,and that they might work downtown), but goes on to explain that wealthy people ‘are able to afford’ living insuburbs. We feel that this is an important part of the reasoning, but we struggle with classifying it under theexisting framework: it is not exactly a factor in itself, because it cannot be unpacked on its own or even with otherICLS 2016 Proceedings895© ISLSfactors. It would not, for instance, be convincing or good mechanistic reasoning to say, “People can afford to livein suburbs, therefore they have longer commute times” (although some students did say that.) Rather, stating thatwealthy people ‘are able to afford’ living certain places seems to offer a justification or backing to the ‘wealthypeople might live in suburbs’ factor by explaining why, for some members of this population, this factor exists.In other words, where the color of a squirrel has a probabilistic effect on what the squirrel can do, the wealth of aperson has a probabilistic interaction with what that person chooses to do.Table 1: Four responses to the prompt about urban planningPoor peoplelive in denseindustrialcenters, whilewealthypeople live inmore spreadout suburbs.(SS1)They typicallylive in thesuburbs and workdowntown sothey have longerdrives forcommute times.(SS2)A wealthy person's income can maketheir commute time longer if they livefarther away from their jobs. Forexample, some wealthy individuals livein suburbs, but their jobs are inindustrial cities. Because they have ahigher income, they are able to affordliving in these communities, but theircommute time is longer than a poorperson who happens to live nearindustrial areas. (SS3)A wealthy person's income could maketheir commute time longer because theycan afford a car, which means theycould get stuck in traffic. They alsohave the ability to choose where theylive based on safety, quality schools,lots of parks, etc - and the place thatfulfills all of these requirements mightbe far from work. (SS4)This is even more evident in SS4’s response: Similar to SS3, SS4 connects wealthy people’s wealth totheir ‘ability to choose where they live’. However, SS4 goes on to list potential wants and desires in wealthypeople that could lead them to make a particular choice: ‘safety, quality schools, lots of parks, etc.’ Finally, SS4gives the underlying factor that actually answers the question: they might choose to live in a place that is ‘far fromwork.’ However, in order to get to this factor, they had to reason through what they assume that people want, andunder what conditions people might (or might not) do that.We believe that this process of reasoning through the conditions and probabilities of human choice is adistinct, and important part of mechanistic reasoning about social issues. In order to fully analyze and assessstudents’ mechanistic reasoning about social issues, we therefore suggest that it is necessary to add an extra stepto Author 2 et al.’s analytical framework: a process of backing or defending the factor identified, based on thechoices that entities have in capacity of their property, and of considerations of the wants and desires that led themto make choices that resulted in the factor. We call this process “social factor backing.” We propose that thisprocess consists of:a) identifying a factor, such as “wealthy people tend to live in suburbs,” that contains an entity and at leastone of the defining properties of the entity (e.g., a person + wealthy);b) recognizing that that factor (that wealthy people live in suburbs) comes out of the relationship betweenentity and property (e.g., wealthy people can afford to live in suburbs because they are wealthy), notbecause of random arrangement or assignment of natural factors;c) walking through the rationale of the entity for making that particular decision (and not any of the otherpossible decisions) by connecting its decision to assumptions about the entity’s underlying wants anddesires (e.g., wealthy people want to live near parks and good schools, and can afford to do so); whichleads to:d) the statement of the factor, which has now been backed (e.g., therefore some wealthy people live insuburbs). This factor can then be unpacked as normal.The additional step to Author 2 et al.’s framework is step b) in which students explicitly reason throughwhat it is about the entity + property relationship that provides choice(s), and in c) in which the student accountfor the particular wants and needs in the entity that led to making that decision. Revisiting SS2 with this newconstruct, we can now more clearly begin to see where this response is lacking with regards to mechanisticreasoning: SS2 correctly identified the two factors (wealthy people live in suburbs, and they work in cities), andunpacked them (‘so they have longer drives’). But SS2’s response neither states that they live there because theirwealth allows them to (b) or that they live there because they chose to (c). So while the overall claim in theexplanation is true, we think that it fails to capture some fundamental, and to us, important underlying socialmechanistic reasons: that people do things for different reasons because of the complex interplay between theirinner wants and desires, and choices afforded to them by their properties.ICLS 2016 Proceedings896© ISLSImplications and conclusionIn this paper, we showed that it can be productive to use mechanistic reasoning to understand students' reasoningabout a social phenomenon. It helped us identify which factors that students reasoned about when they explainedthe phenomenon, and it helped us structure an analysis of how these factors taken together caused the phenomenonto occur. However, the existing framework we used did not allow us to fully capture the kind of reasoning thatstudents did about how entities have a range of options because of something inherent in them, and how they thenreasoned about the decision making process. By adding ‘social factors backing’, we were able to more fullyaccount for this part of their reasoning. We believe that this could be an important component of reasoningmechanistically about social phenomena, and that a consideration to the choice- and options-elements may beimportant in the study of, and design for learning activities about, social mechanisms.Our treatment of students’ reasoning did not consider the important connection between language andideology (Fairclough, 1995, 2003; van Djik 1998), and treated the use of ‘poor’ as equal to ‘low-income’.Lexicalizations like these may express important difference in reasoning, in particular relating to social factors,like the wants and needs of social actors. Student responses also implied that certain outcomes were more desirablethan others, but these aspects of thinking were ignored for the purpose of this analysis. Future work should includeconsiderations to these value-laden aspects of language use.The C3 framework’s focus on ‘complex causal reasoning’ suggests an increasing focus on reasoning insocial sciences education at the K-12 level. Research in science education has for decades improved ourunderstanding of what causal reasoning about the natural sciences looks like. The early findings in this papersuggest that mechanistic reasoning can be a productive lens on students’ reasoning in social sciences. Future workwill aim to improve our understanding of social mechanistic reasoning with an eye towards the larger educationalgoals: building curriculum to support and develop this kind of mechanistic reasoning; exploring this with differentsocial phenomena, and building meaningful assessments of student learning.ReferencesKrist, C., Schwarz, C. V., & Reiser, B. J. (manuscript under review). Identifying and supporting crosscuttingepistemic heuristics that guide mechanistic reasoning in science learning.Fairclough, Norman. (1995) Analysing Discourse: Textual Analysis for Social Research. Routledge, London, UK.Fairclough, Norman. (2003) Critical Discourse Analysis: The Critical Study of Language. Longman Pub Group,London, UK.Jacobson, M., and Wilensky, U. (2006) “Complex Systems in Education: Scientific and Educational Importanceand Implications for the Learning Sciences.” Journal of the Learning Sciences 15, no. 1: 11.Lee, Y. C. (2012). Socio-scientific issues in health contexts: treading a rugged terrain. International Journal ofScience Education, 34(3), 459-483.Machamer, P., Darden, L., & Craver, C. F. (2000). Thinking about mechanisms. Philosophy of science, 1-25.National Council for the Social Studies (NCSS). The College, Career, and Civic Life (C3) Framework for SocialStudies State Standards: Guidance for Enhancing the Rigor of K–12 Civics, Economics, Geography, andHistory. Author Silver Spring, MD, 2013.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. National Academies Press,Washington DC.Pedretti, E., & Nazir, J. (2011). Currents in STSE education: Mapping a complex field, 40 years on. ScienceEducation, 95(4), 601-626.Russ, R. S., Scherr, R. E., Hammer, D., & Mikeska, J. (2008). Recognizing mechanistic reasoning in studentscientific inquiry: A framework for discourse analysis developed from philosophy of science. ScienceEducation, 92(3), 499-525.Senge, P. M., & Sterman, J. D. (1992). Systems thinking and organizational learning: Acting locally and thinkingglobally in the organization of the future.European journal of operational research, 59(1), 137-150.van Dijk, Teun A. (1998) Ideology: A Multidisciplinary Approach. 1st ed. SAGE Publications Ltd, London, UK.Vattam, S. S., Goel, A. K., Rugaber, S., Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Jordan, R., Gray, S., & Sinha, S. (2011).Understanding complex natural systems by articulating structure-behavior-function models. Journal ofEducational Technology & Society, 14(1), 66-81.Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo. http:ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo. Center for Connected Learning and ComputerBased Modeling, Northwestern University. Evanston, IL.Wilensky, U., & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in levels: A dynamic systems approach to making sense of theworld. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 8(1), 3-19.ICLS 2016 Proceedings897© ISLS