Curiosity Practice: A Powerful New Lever for Fostering ScienceEngagementLeema K. Berland, Rosemary S. Russ, and Noah Weeth Feinsteinlberland@wisc.edu, rruss@wisc.edu, nfeinstein@wisc.eduUniversity of Wisconsin, Madison, Curriculum and InstructionAbstract: Curiosity is a perennial theme in science education policy documents and informalscience education (ISE) mission statements. However, formal and informal science experiencesoften minimize curiosity by reinforcing an image of science as the territory of right and wrong.In this poster, we argue that this has negative implications for individual’s participation in ISE.We then present Curiosity Practices, our approach to helping parents and children develop asense of curiosity around natural phenomena.IntroductionImagine a parent driving the car when his child asks “Why do we put sand on the roads?” The parent mightrespond by stating the answer, suggesting they look it up, or calling an expert. All of these responses answer herquestion. But what if he treated the question as an opportunity to explore how the world works rather than explain?In this case, the parent might say “I notice they only put sand on the road after it snows,” and the child mightrecall rough sand sticking to her skin at the beach. Here, parents and children would work together to check newideas against what they know about other things and generate more questions.This approach of exploring and making sense of the question is an example of practicing curiosity aboutscience. Curiosity is something people do— “[it] is expressed through actions and attitudes that manifestthemselves in wanting to know ‘why’” (Hensley, 2004, p. 32). Many of us practice curiosity throughout our lives– from unpacking why a friend is angry with us to investigating the latest political turmoil. However, many of usdo not experience curiosity around science related topics. Instead, we tend to think of science as a collection offinal form facts to memorize, and this lack of curiosity can have negative implications for whether and how weparticipate in science, and science adjacent, activities. In this poster, we will present Curiosity Practices, ourapproach to helping parents and children develop a sense of curiosity around natural phenomena.Grounding literatureScience outreach and education often (implicitly) assumes that improving individuals’ knowledge of sciencecontent and the scientific process will improve their attitudes toward science, and how they participate in scientificactivities. However, a growing body of evidence demonstrates this is not true: increased knowledge has only amodest impact on attitudes and actions (see review in National Academies, 2016). In this project, we build on anemerging literature from psychology to offer an alternative approach: curiosity—rather than knowledge—as apotentially powerful lever for changing whether and how individuals participate in ISEs (see Figure 1).Whether one participatesUnfortunately, informal science experiences disproportionally serve the students and families who already haveaccess to good science education (Dawson, 2014). In fact, research suggests that parents are likely to avoid ISEswhen they believe that they need to provide their children an answer (Hill & Tyson, 2009). Thus, the parents whoare less comfortable with science ideas are less likely to create opportunities to explore science with their children,thereby passing their discomfort on. This study builds on the increasing body of evidence showing that a sense ofICLS 2018 Proceedings1433© ISLScuriosity can reduce this sort of anxiety around the right answer (Bishop et al., 2004) by decreasing an individual’sworry about judgement and defensiveness about their (lack of) understanding, and hence, potentially increase thelikelihood that they will participate in science activities.How one participatesHow one participates in science, and science adjacent, activities and discussions is deeply shaped by our identities(Kahan, Jenkins-Smith, and Braman, 2011). Instead of evaluating and considering evidence, we tend to discountcontradictory information and bolster our existing ideas (e.g., Mercier, 2011) and the ideas of the communitieswith which we identify. For example, one’s beliefs about climate and energy are more closely linked to politicalaffiliation than knowledge of the underlying science (Pew Research, 2016). In short, our identification with“sides” reduces our curiosity about other ideas, which perpetuates and strengthens the polarization in ourcommunities. Yet there is intriguing evidence that being more curious about science increases openness to ideasthat contradict one’s own beliefs (Kahan et al., 2017).Design innovationFormal schools are notoriously bad at fostering a sense of curiosity and informal science experiences in settingssuch as museums have shown mixed results highly dependent on the design of the ISE experiences and the socialcontext of the experience (NRC, 2009). Thus, our project explores the possibility of developing a “practice ofcuriosity” in children and families through Curiosity Practices.The term Curiosity Practice encapsulates the theoretical and practical parts of our innovation.Theoretically, we use the term practice to describe an activity in which a community regularly participates thatentails shared norms and goals (Berland, 2011). Here, the term represents a shared norm of elevating curiosity –rather than content – in the families that participate. Practically, we use the term practice to describe an activitywe do to get better at something—like soccer practice.In the practical sense, Curiosity Practices – our novel instructional design approach – are informalconversations with children and adults in which they explore everyday science topics with the goal of exploringsomething puzzling, rather than explaining it. In these conversations, children and adults are encouraged to drawon their everyday knowledge, make connections between different ideas, and seek causal explanations as theydevelop curiosity about how the world around them works.Our posterOur poster is designed to introduce Curiosity Practices to the ICLS community and receive feedback on both thedesign of the activity and the theories grounding it. We will do so with a poster that has two foci. On one side,we will define curiosity, and its theoretical potential for transforming whether our of Curiosity Practices, and theprinciples guiding our design.ReferencesBerland, L. K. (2011). Explaining Variation in How Classroom Communities Adapt the Practice of ScientificArgumentation. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 20(4), 625–664.Bishop, S. R., Lau, M., Shapiro, S., Carlson, L., Anderson, N. D., Carmody, J., … Devins, G. (2004). Mindfulness:A Proposed Operational Definition. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 11(3), 230–241.https://doi.org/10.1093/clipsy.bph077Dawson, E. (2014). Equity in informal science education: developing an access and equity framework for sciencemuseums and science centres. Studies in Science Education, 50(2), 209-247.Hill, N. E., & Tyson, D. F. (2009). Parental involvement in middle school: a meta-analytic assessment of thestrategies that promote achievement. Developmental psychology, 45(3), 740.Hensley, Randy B. 2004. Curiosity and creativity as attributes of information literacy. Reference & User ServicesQuarterly., 44(1): 31–36.Kahan, D. M., Jenkins‐Smith, H., & Braman, D. (2011). Cultural cognition of scientific consensus. Journal ofRisk Research, 14(2), 147-174.Mercier, H., & Sperber, D. (2011). Why do humans reason? Arguments for an argumentative theory. Behavioraland Brain Sciences, 34(2), 57–74.National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2016). Science literacy: Concepts, contexts, andconsequences. National Academies Press.National Research Council. (2009). Learning science in informal environments: People, places, and pursuits.Washington DC: National Academies Press.ICLS 2018 Proceedings1434© ISLS