Managing Threats to Teacher Face in Discussions of VideoRecorded LessonsDana Vedder-Weiss, Aliza Segal, and Adam Lefsteinvedderwe@post.bgu.ac.il, alizas@bgu.ac.il, lefstein@bgu.ac.ilBen-Gurion University of the NegevAbstract: Scholars and educators are increasingly enthusiastic about the potential benefits ofvideo-based teacher learning. However, collaborative analysis of video is a complex socialendeavor entailing numerous obstacles to learning, central among them face threats. In this study,we use linguistic ethnographic methods to investigate the implications for teacher face of usingvideo in professional development, and the implications of teacher facework for their learning. Weanalyze 15 case studies of video-based discussions in school-based teacher teams, identifying andclassifying face-threatening acts and the facework involved in responding to them. We thenidentify and analyze exemplary cases involving key facework strategies (face threat avoidance,face defending, and face correction), focusing on the ways these strategies opened up or closeddown opportunities for learning. This study will contribute to our understanding of the interactionof social and cognitive dimensions of professional learning in general, and of teacher facework invideo-based professional development.Keywords: teacher learning, video-based professional development, face, linguistic ethnographyVideo-based teacher professional learningResearch has demonstrated the potential benefits of on-the-job teacher collaborative discourse for instructionalimprovement (Little, 1982; Wilson & Berne, 1999). Particularly productive, studies suggest, is discourse thatdeprivatizes teaching practice (Bryk, Sebring, Allensworth, Luppescu & Easton, 2010; Little, 1990), involves richrepresentations of everyday classroom experiences (Gaudin & Chalies, 2015; Little, 2003; Van Es & Sherin,2002), and engages practitioners in collaborative and reflective inquiry on problems of practice (Horn, 2005; Horn& Little, 2010; Lefstein & Snell, 2013).In particular, educational researchers and teacher educators are increasingly enthusiastic about thepotential benefits of video representations of classroom practice as tools in teachers’ learning (e.g., Sherin, Jacobs& Philipp, 2011; Zhang, Lundeberg, Koehler & Eberhardt, 2011). Video-based discussions have the potential tocultivate collaborative teacher professional learning; make classroom practice public and explore theory inrelation to concrete problems of practice (Darling-Hammond & Sykes, 1999; Stoll & Louis, 2007; VillegasReimers, 2003). However, video-based discussions entail exposure, which may be experienced as threatening byteachers who are concerned about accountability or are uncertain about the quality of their own performance.Above all, such exposure and the associated discussions of video-recorded practice inevitably lead to face threats.While the efficacy of video-based learning has been demonstrated, the social processes through whichteachers learn in such settings have yet to be thoroughly examined. This gap is particularly significant in light ofevidence that teachers’ work is governed by non-collaborative norms such as privacy, individualism andnoninterference (Hargreaves, 1994; Little, 1990; Lortie, 1975). Video-based learning works against such norms,by exposing practice to scrutiny and critique in ways that other discussions, such as planning or consulting, donot. When colleagues watch a video of a teacher's practice, the video-recorded teacher has little control over whatis exposed, relative to, for example, sharing a problem of practice through replay or rehearsal (Horn, 2010). Inaddition, video analysis often takes place in situations of complex power relations – among teachers, schoolmanagement and external coaches (Lefstein & Snell, 2011). Thus, while video analysis has great potential forteacher learning, it is a complex social endeavor entailing numerous obstacles for learning. This study aims toshed light on this complexity through a linguistic ethnographic investigation of teachers' face-work in video-baseddiscussions.Framed by a socio-cultural perspective, in this study, we view learning in teacher teams as involvingactive participation in a community of practice (Wenger, 1999). We foreground social processes over individualones, focusing on opportunities to learn, i.e., the ways access to professional knowledge is provided to participants,affording changes in participation and practice (Horn & Kane, 2015). Opportunities to learn are constructedthrough actions and interactions interpreted by members of the community. As an important facet of all socialprocesses, facework is necessarily an important aspect of processes of social learning.ICLS 2016 Proceedings783© ISLSFace workFace is one's positive image before others. It may be defined as the positive social value “a person effectivelyclaims for himself” (Goffman 1955, p. 5) by presenting one’s ‘self’ to others – and being perceived by them – inparticular ways. A person may be presented through interaction as successful, or kind, or intelligent, or whateversocial attributes are valued in that setting, and this is the image, or face, that the other parties to the interactionperceive. "Face, therefore, is precisely the conceptualization each of us makes of our ‘self’ through the construalof others in social interaction and particularly in verbal interaction, i.e. through talk" (Watts, 2003, p.124). Faceis subject to constant, ongoing negotiation through micro-processes of talk and interaction. It is a changeable,unstable entity "diffusely located in the flow of events" (Goffman, 1955, p.7).The work we do in social interaction to enable our self and others to construct and maintain face, is calledfacework. Facework is ‘the actions taken by a person to make whatever he is doing consistent with face. Facework serves to counteract ‘‘incidents” -- that is, events whose effective symbolic implications threaten face.’(Goffman, 1955, p. 12). Generally, the prevalent social norm is face maintenance, that is: people are expected tobehave in a way that maintains both their own face (defensive orientation) and that of others (protectiveorientation), and prevents loss of face (Brown & Levinson, 1978). This is done by identifying potential face threatsand working towards mitigating them, by: (a) avoiding them (e.g., changing the subject of discussion when itapproaches a sensitive topic); (b) defending or protecting face when a threat is posed (e.g., by justifying a criticizedbehavior) and (c) reconstructing or correcting face when it was harmed (e.g., by apologizing or compensatingthrough complimenting).Nevertheless, in some social situations, face threatening acts are legitimate and even called for (e.g.,news interviews). In other situations, such as video-based discussions, the observed teacher’s face is on the lineby virtue of the exposure of her practice and speech acts that are endemic to this activity, such as advice giving,evaluation and questioning (Copland, 2011). It is therefore important to understand:1. What are the implications of using video for teachers' facework?2. What are prevalent acts of facework in teachers learning from video: How do teachers: (a) avoid facethreat? (b) Defend their own face? (c) Protect their colleagues' face? (d) Correct face loss?3. What are the implications of such facework for teacher learning from video-based discussions ofpractice?We explore these questions by analyzing 15 case studies of video-based discussions in school-based teacher teams.Research methodsThe data for this study was collected in the context of a large design-based implementation research projectfocusing upon teacher professional discourse and leadership. In the development year of this study, we workedwith the coordinators of ten teacher teams in four schools in a large Israeli school district. These teacher leaderswere responsible for facilitating weekly team meetings in their schools. In addition, they participated in a biweekly professional development workshop, in which they were provided with tools for fostering and enhancingthe pedagogical discourse in their in-school meetings. We conducted participant observations in 118 of these teammeetings over the course of the 2014-2015 school year; we audio-recorded these meetings, kept field notes,interviewed participating teacher leaders and recorded professional development workshops.The data corpus for this study is comprised of 15 team meetings in which teachers discussed videos ofclassroom practice of an attending member of the team. One of the tools introduced in the program is protocolsfor video-based discussions. The protocols provide guidelines for structuring professional conversations,including delineation of roles, topics, sequences and ways of talking. The idea behind the protocol is to facilitatethe development of productive norms for discussing practice and to counter restricting norms, such asnormalization of problems of practice on one hand and hypercriticism on the other.Data analysis and preliminary findingsTo explore the implications of using video for teacher facework we analyze the data through both systematiccoding of the episode and microanalysis. We identify face-threatening acts and classify them using categoriesbased on Goffman (1955) and Brown and Levinson (1978), which we have further refined based upon our initialanalysis (Table 1). The coding distinguishes between acts that threaten the face of the filmed teacher and areinitiated by her ("self face") and face threatening acts that are initiated by others ("other face"). For example, theface of the filmed teacher may be threatened by criticizing the practice she exhibits in the video, but such facethreat may have different implications depending on whether she criticizes herself or others criticize her. We thencode these events (that involve face threatening acts) for facework that acts to: (a) avoid face threat; (b) defendICLS 2016 Proceedings784© ISLSself or protect other's face when a threat is posed; and (c) reconstruct face when face was lost. Through thisanalysis we aim to provide a broad and nuanced account of different types of teacher facework in video-baseddiscussions (Table 1).Table 1. Initial coding schemeSelf faceFace-threatavoidanceProtect/defendfaceCorrect(reconstruct) faceOther faceChange topicIgnoreWithhold questionsWithhold disagreementNormalizeAsk reassurance, self-reassureAttribute blameJustifyExplainWithhold critiqueReassureCompensate (e.g., self success story, selfprovided solution)PunishRetreatHumorApologizeCompensate (e.g., other's success story, selfface threat, Compliment)To investigate the implications of different types of face work on teachers learning, we identify illustrativecases (based on the coding above) representing discourse dominated by:1. Face threat avoidance. For example, in one team, video based discussions were limited to "appreciativefeedback" in which participants highlighted positive aspects of the observed practice and avoided askingsubstantive questions, problematizing or criticizing practice.2. Face defending and protecting. For example, in one case, teachers raised questions regarding a practicethey observed in the video, whereby the teacher dictated the correct answer for the students to write.Following this potentially face-threatening questioning, the filmed teacher and her colleagues engagedin a series of acts (reasoning, blaming) that served to justify and unproblematize the teaching practice.3. Face correction. For example, in one case a teacher was criticized for her failure to foster student talk inher class. The other teachers interrogated her, compared her practice to their own "successful" ones andgave her advice. She suffered face loss. Reconstructing her face she went into great length telling a heroicstory of her own professional success.Our analysis of these illustrative cases employs linguistic ethnographic methods (Rampton, Maybin & Roberts,2015): we repeatedly listen to recorded episodes, transcribe them in detail, and brainstorm about what washappening and what we found interesting. We then use micro-analytic methods to analyze the sequential unfoldingof selected events. Such analysis involves proceeding slowly through the recording, asking at each line, “What isthe speaker doing?” “Why that, now?” “How does this turn at talk respond to what came before?” “What elsemight have been done here but wasn’t?” etc. (Rampton, 2006). We focus on the ways different types of faceworkopened up or closed down opportunities to learn (Horn & Kane, 2015), such as identifying problems of practice,reframing them and deliberating about them, multiplicity of interpretations and alternative courses of action andconsiderations of the pros and cons of each of them. This analysis also incorporates data from field notes,coordinators interviews and the workshop recordings, in which participants shared their perspective on the videoand the analyzed discussions.Significance and contributionThis study will contribute to our understanding of teachers’ video-based learning, and in particular to the socialprocesses such learning entails. It will yield practical recommendations of ways to enhance the productivity ofteachers’ video-based learning. It will also shed light, more generally, on the implication of face threat andfacework on professional learning.ICLS 2016 Proceedings785© ISLSReferencesBrown, P., & Levinson, S. C. (1978). Universals in language usage: Politeness phenomena. In Questions andpoliteness: Strategies in social interaction (pp. 56-311). Cambridge University Press.Bryk, A. S., Sebring, P. B., Allensworth, E., Easton, J. Q., & Luppescu, S. (2010). Organizing schools forimprovement: Lessons from Chicago. University of Chicago Press.Copland, F. (2011). Negotiating face in feedback conferences: A linguistic ethnographic analysis. Journal ofpragmatics, 43(15), 3832-3843.Darling-Hammond, L., & Sykes, G. (1999). Teaching as the Learning Profession: Handbook of Policy andPractice. Jossey-Bass Education Series. Jossey-Bass Inc., Publishers, 350 Sansome St., San Francisco,CA 94104.Gaudin, C., & Chalies, S. (2015). Video viewing in teacher education and professional development: a literaturereview. Educational Research Review.Goffman, E. (1955). On face-work: An analysis of ritual elements in social interaction. Psychiatry, 18(3), 213231.Hargreaves, A. (1994). Changing teachers, changing times: Teachers' work and culture in the postmodern age.Teachers College Press.Horn, I. S. (2005). Learning on the job: A situated account of teacher learning in high school mathematicsdepartments. Cognition and Instruction, 23(2), 207-236.Horn, I. S. (2010). Teaching replays, teaching rehearsals, and re-visions of practice: Learning from colleagues ina mathematics teacher community. The Teachers College Record, 112(1).Horn, I. S., & Kane, B. D. (2015). Opportunities for Professional Learning in Mathematics Teacher WorkgroupConversations: Relationships to Instructional Expertise. Journal of the Learning Sciences.Horn, I. S., & Little, J. W. (2010). Attending to problems of practice: Routines and resources for professionallearning in teachers’ workplace interactions. American Educational Research Journal, 47(1), 181-217.Lefstein, A., & Snell, J. (2011). Professional vision and the politics of teacher learning. Teaching and TeacherEducation, 27(3), 505-514.Lefstein, A., & Snell, J. (2013). Better than best practice: Developing teaching and learning through dialogue.Routledge.Little, J. W. (1982). Norms of collegiality and experimentation: Workplace conditions of schoolsuccess. American educational research journal, 19(3), 325-340Little, J. W. (1990). The persistence of privacy: Autonomy and initiative in teachers' professional relations. TheTeachers College Record, 91(4), 509-536.Little, J. W. (2003). Inside teacher community: Representations of classroom practice. The Teachers CollegeRecord, 105(6), 913-945.Lortie, D. C. (1975). School teacher: A sociological inquiry. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Rampton, B. (2006). Language in Late Modernity: Interaction in an Urban School. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Rampton, Maybin & Roberts, 2015Sherin, M. G., Jacobs, V. R. & Philipp, R. A. (Eds.). (2011). Mathematics Teacher Noticing: Seeing throughTeachers' Eyes. New York: Routledge.Stoll, L., & Louis, K. S. (2007). Professional learning communities: Divergence, depth and dilemmas. McGrawHill Education (UK).Van Es, E. A., & Sherin, M. G. (2002). Learning to notice: Scaffolding new teachers’ interpretations of classroominteractions. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 10(4), 571-596.Villegas-Reimers, E. (2003). Teacher professional development: an international review of the literature. Paris:International Institute for Educational Planning.Watts, R. J. (2003). Politeness. Cambridge University Press.Wenger, E. (1999). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge university press.Wilson, S. M., & Berne, J. (1999). Teacher learning and the acquisition of professional knowledge: Anexamination of research on contemporary professional development. Review of research in education,173-209.Zhang, M., Lundeberg, M., Koehler, M. J., & Eberhardt, J. (2011). Understanding affordances and challenges ofthree types of video for teacher professional development. Teaching and Teacher Education, 27(2), 454462.ICLS 2016 Proceedings786© ISLS