Designing the Idea Manager to Integrate STEM Content andPractices During a Technology-Based Inquiry InvestigationErika D. Tate, bluknowledge llc, erika@bluknowledge.comMingyu Feng, Center for Technology in Learning, SRI International, mingyu.feng@sri.comKevin W. McElhaney, Center for Technology in Learning, SRI International, kevin.mcelhaney@sri.comAbstract: This design study investigates the role of the Idea Manager, a formative technologybased learning tool, in student learning that integrates STEM practices and disciplinary content.We coordinated curriculum and assessment frameworks to design instructional features of aSTEMGenetics unit that engages middle school students in a set of interrelated STEM practices:use a model to construct an explanation of the trait expression mechanism in rice plants. Ouranalysis of 99 student team responses to three embedded assessments generated formativeevidence that delineated three tiers of explainers (non-mechanistic, partial mechanistic, andmechanistic). These students differed in their knowledge and abilities to perform theseinterrelated STEM practices. We discuss implications of the findings for how (a) teachers candifferentiate instruction for students of all levels and across a range of STEM disciplines andinterrelated sets of practices and (b) technology tools can be designed to support teachers.Keywords: science practices, technology, design, student learning, life scienceIntroductionA growing emphasis on STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) requires researchers andpractitioners to design learning activities that promote an integrated understanding of STEM topics, applications,and approaches (NRC, 2012). In the past, student learning in STEM has been limited to (a) remembering a set ofisolated scientific and mathematical facts often perceived as irrelevant and (b) applying this nominalunderstanding to prescribed calculations and procedures with limited opportunity for reflection and revision ofthinking. New standards for STEM teaching, learning, and assessment call for students to engage in a variety ofSTEM practices (e.g., use a model, such as a scientific visualization) in order to understand content comprised ofdisciplinary core ideas (e.g., heredity) and crosscutting concepts (e.g., cause and effect) that bridge STEM fields.These standards also require students to draw upon this more robust understanding of STEM to design and testsolutions to existing or potential real-world challenges (NRC, 2012; NGSS, 2013).These shifts in policy and practice have created a great demand for the learning sciences community totransform STEM teaching and learning. Researchers have problematized what it means to teach and learn STEMpractices, asserting that these practices are valuable dimensions of disciplinary work that are learnable,interrelated, and benefit from ongoing evaluation and critique. This requires researchers and practitioners toreframe STEM teaching and learning and generate evidence for how teachers, curricula, and technology can shapeSTEM participation across different learning settings (e.g., Erduran & Dagher, 2014; Ford, 2015; Stroupe, 2015).This need presents opportunities to bridge curriculum and assessment frameworks that inform the principleddesign of STEM learning environments intended to engage students in STEM practices and deepen their STEMdisciplinary content knowledge (Debarger et al., 2014).In this study, we focus on a Grade 7 STEMGenetics curriculum unit developed at Michigan StateUniversity and SRI International that builds on students’ understandings of key genetics concepts. Thedevelopment of the unit was informed by knowledge integration (KI) and evidence-centered design (ECD)perspectives (Debarger et al., 2014). We investigate the role of Idea Manager (McElhaney, Matuk, Miller, & Linn,2012), a formative technology-based learning tool embedded in the unit, to answer the following researchquestions: (1) How does the Idea Manager scaffold middle school students to integrate STEM practices anddisciplinary content during a technology-based inquiry investigation? (2) How does the formative evidencegenerated with the Idea Manager differentiate students’ ability to engage in interrelated STEM practices: use amodel and construct an explanation?This study contributes to the growing body of research that seeks to (a) identify the knowledge andabilities needed to perform STEM practices and (b) develop a more nuanced understanding of the types of designfeatures that can support learning of STEM content and practices (NRC, 2012; McElhaney, 2012; Debarger, 2014;Stroupe, 2015; Erduran & Dagher, 2014). The remainder of this paper (1) describes our coordinated theoreticalapproach, (2) details the methodology, and (3) presents findings about how the Idea Manager scaffolds studentICLS 2016 Proceedings210© ISLSlearning and provides formative evidence that distinguishes proficiencies in STEM practices and contentknowledge. We conclude with a set of implications for STEM classroom learning and future research.Coordinated theoretical approach to designing for integrated STEM learningWe draw upon knowledge integration (KI) and evidence-centered design (ECD) to (a) articulate integratedlearning goals and outcomes, (b) define learning engagement and evidence, and (c) organize learning task featuresin the STEMGenetics learning environment. KI characterizes learning in everyday life and designed learningenvironments as the opportunity to (a) add ideas about STEM topics, practices, and disciplines to learners’ existingrepertoire of ideas and (b) revise the connection learners make between existing and new ideas into an increasinglyintegrated understanding of science. The KI design framework guides the design of coherent STEM instruction(Kali, Linn, & Roseman, 2008; Linn & Eylon, 2006; Lee et al., 2010). The metaprinciples (make scienceaccessible, make thinking visible, help students learn from each other, and promote autonomous and lifelonglearning) communicate the nature and quality of learning experiences that promote knowledge integration. Theinstructional patterns (e.g., develop a model, engage in argument with evidence) help designers coordinatelearning activities that (a) engage students in the knowledge integration process (elicit ideas - add ideas distinguish ideas - reflect on/explain ideas) and (b) scaffold students’ participation in STEM practices (Bransford,Brown, & Cocking, 2000; Linn, Davis, & Bell, 2004).While KI emphasizes deepening students’ understanding in a discipline through practice, evidencecentered design (Mislevy & Haertel, 2006) can heighten instructional designers’ awareness of how assessmentsprovide evidence for learning as it occurs during instruction. ECD provides a principled framework to analyze thetarget learning domain and structure the articulation of (1) integrated learning goals that specify the knowledgeand abilities of interest, (2) evidence that will be produced in the form of student work products, and (3) designfeatures of learning environments and tasks that elicit this evidence from students (Mislevy & Haertel, 2006;Debarger, 2014). The coordination of KI and ECD frameworks results in the principled design of instruction andassessment that guide students toward an integrated understanding of STEM content and practices. The instructionincludes deliberate learning activities that explicitly engage students in knowledge integration and offer multipleopportunities for teachers to formatively evaluate student progress. With careful design, the coordinatedframework allows these learning and assessment opportunities to distinguish separable proficiencies within thedomain so that teachers can focus their subsequent instruction where it is most needed.Design features that scaffold students to integrate STEM content and practicesThis research utilizes the Web-based Inquiry in Science Environment (WISE), an online platform aligned withthe KI design framework. WISE features a suite of learning tools to support STEM teaching and learning, such aswriting prompts (e.g., critique and feedback), activity templates (e.g., inquiry and role play, brainstorm),interactive simulations (e.g., dynamic scientific models), and explanation generation tools (e.g., Idea Manager)(Slotta & Linn, 2009). The Idea Manager includes the (1) Idea Basket, a persistent space where students add andsort information ideas as they learn and (2) Explanation Builder, an organizing space where students (a) considerall the ideas in their idea basket and (b) distinguish and sort relevant ideas into the desired scientific explanation(McElhaney, 2012). We designed instruction using the Idea Manager to (a) guide student engagement in theknowledge integration process, (b) scaffold student learning of the disciplinary core ideas (e.g., trait expressionmechanism) and the STEM practices (e.g., use a model and construct an explanation), and (c) offer opportunitiesto formatively evaluate progress toward integrated STEM understanding. Table 1 organizes the contributions ofthe KI and ECD design frameworks across three design dimensions and exemplifies resulting design features ofthe Idea Manger in the Grade 7 STEMGenetics unit.Learning contextOur collaborative design team of education researchers, curriculum and assessment designers, biologists,technology developers, and teachers designed the Grade 7 STEMGenetics unit to promote students’ understandingof inheritance through STEM practices of using models and constructing explanations (NRC, 2012). The unitintroduces a situation where the world will be running short of food and fossil fuels in 2052 and students inquireabout how to selectively breed for more nutritious rice in order to propose a genetics-driven solution to end worldhunger. As students answer the driving question, “How can you use genetics to feed the world in 2052?”, theyengage in a variety of WISE learning activities, hands-on laboratories, and whole class discussions facilitated bythe teacher. This study was based on the second design iteration of the STEMGenetics Grade 7 unit, which hasbeen informed by evidence from the pilot study (Debarger, 2014) and teacher feedback during a co-designprofessional learning session.ICLS 2016 Proceedings211© ISLSTable 1: Contributions of KI and ECD design frameworks across design dimensions for instructionsDesignDimensionsLearningGoals andOutcomesLearningEngagementand EvidenceLearningTask Featuresand FlowContributions of KI and ECD DesignFrameworksKI: Connections between keydisciplinary ideas that promote lifelonglearningECD: Combination of contentknowledge and practices as the target ofinstruction and embedded assessmentsResulting Design Features of Instruction using the IdeaManagerLearning Performance: Students can use a model showing themechanistic processes of trait expression to construct anexplanation about why an organism has a particular traitKI: Learning as engagement througheliciting, adding, distinguishing, andsorting ideasLearning Engagement: Students (1) observe model to addideas about trait expression and (2) construct an explanationto distinguish and sort ideas about trait expressionECD: Clear articulation of evidenceproduced by students to indicateprogress toward and attainment oflearning goalsLearning Evidence: Students (1) use a model of traitexpression to document mechanistic elements of thephenomenon of trait expression and (2) construct a scientificexplanation integrating observable and non-observableaspects about why an organism has a particular traitKI: Application of design patterns andtools to promote knowledge integrationwithin and across tasksECD: Specification of instructional andassessment design features to elicitdesired evidencePrompts for students to (1) focus students’ use of the modelon mechanistic aspects of the phenomenon and documentthem in the idea basket and (2) use idea basket entries toconstruct an explanation about the phenomenonLearning goals and outcomesBased on our analysis of the Framework for K-12 Science Education (NRC, 2012), the design team initiallydeveloped twelve learning goals for the unit that centered on the disciplinary core ideas that comprise a deepunderstanding of inheritance for 7th grade students (e.g., trait expression and sexual reproduction) and two STEMpractices: developing and using models and constructing explanations. Findings from our pilot study prompted usto recast the twelve learning goals into five learning performances that explicitly consider the application of theSTEM practices within genetics (Debarger, 2014). This study focuses on the learning performance: Students canuse a model showing the mechanistic processes of trait expression to construct an explanation about why anorganism has a particular trait.Learning engagement and evidenceFor each learning performance, we articulated statements that clarify the evidence students would need to indicateprogress toward the learning goal. The evidence for the focal learning performance included: students (1) use amodel of trait expression to document mechanistic elements of the phenomenon of trait expression and (2)construct a scientific explanation integrating observable and non-observable aspects about why an organism hasa particular trait. To generate this evidence, students were requested to (a) first observe a dynamic scientificmodel that visibly explained how the structures, functions, and interactions of alleles, messengers, ribosomes,proteins, and starch yield the high-, medium-, or low-nutrition traits observed in rice plants, (b) add theirobservations as ideas in their idea basket that described how the model elements represented the trait expressionmechanism, and (c) use the Explanation Builder to distinguish and sort these model observations into anorganizing space, and use selected observations as evidence to build an explanation of the trait expressionmechanism in high-nutrition rice plants.Specific prompts were designed to guide students’ observation of the models; students were asked to addat least one idea for each mechanistic element during or after their model observations (Figure 1a). The ideasadded at the model steps provide formative evidence for how well students understood the model. Later in theExplanation Builder, students were instructed to (a) consider all the observations in their idea basket and (b)distinguish which ideas were relevant to their scientific explanation of the trait expression mechanism in high-ICLS 2016 Proceedings212© ISLSnutrition rice plants (Figure 1b). As students constructed their explanations, they sorted these ideas into anevidence-based characterization of trait expression mechanism in rice plants.(a)(b)Figure 1. Screenshots of (a) model observation step with specific prompts and (b) examples of students’ ideasplaced in the organizing space.MethodologyResearch setting and participantsTwo 7th grade science teachers who taught 50 and 49 teams of 2-3 students at two middle schools within the samedistrict in the southwestern USA used the STEMGenetics unit in their classrooms during the 2013-14 school year.The district is comprised of 64% African American, 28% Hispanic, and 8% Caucasian students; sixty-one percentof the district’s students receive free or reduced price lunch.Data sources and scoringThe data of this study come from a set of embedded assessments in the unit: (a) the idea basket in the two activities,(b) the organizing space at the end of the two activities, and (c) students’ responses to the prompt of theExplanation Builder at the end of activity four, “Explain what happens inside a rice plant that makes it highnutrition.”Idea basket and organizing spaceTo investigate how the Idea Manager tool scaffolded students’ use of a model to construct coherent scientificexplanations of the trait expression mechanism, we designed a conceptual inventory (CI) rubric to score ideas inthe idea basket and organizing space (Table 2). The CI rubric identified ideas for five non-observable cellularstructures that comprise the trait expression mechanism: genetic information, messengers, ribosomes, proteins,and starch. For each of these mechanistic elements, a set of possible normative ideas were listed to guide scoringof each idea in the idea basket and organizing space. If an idea was present and accurate about a mechanisticelement, it received a score of 1. If absent or non-normative, it received a score of 0. Two researchers (the firstand second authors) established inter-rater reliability of 95%, then coded separate sets of student responses. Wethen computed composite scores for the idea basket and organizing space for each student group by adding theirscores on all ideas together (e.g., normative model score: number of normative ideas added during a modelobservation step).Scientific explanationWe constructed and applied a 5-score KI rubric to students’ explanations of the trait expression mechanism at theend of the activity. The rubric was iteratively revised based on several rounds of team feedback and review ofsamples of student work with consideration of boundaries between scores and distribution of scores (Table 3).ICLS 2016 Proceedings213© ISLSTwo researchers established inter-rater reliability of 90%, then coded separate sets of student group responses.Each team’s explanation was assigned a KI score of 1-5.Table 2: Sample CI rubric for scoring of students’ ideas about trait expression mechanism in rice plantsMechanistic ElementsPossible Normative IdeaStudent Examples(G) Genetic Information G3. The allele combination is two highnutrition allelesThe allele combination was high nutrition. -- WISEID 137243(M) MessengerM2. The messenger is/has/carries geneticinformation or instructions from theallele/chromosomeThe messengers are genes that are sent out to theribosomes to make proteins. -- WISE ID 136931(R) RibosomeR2. The ribosomes use instructions fromthe messenger or genetic information tocreate a proteinThe ribosomes make proteins and use the geneticinfo from the messenger to make up the body in acertain way. -- WISE ID 13589(P) ProteinP2. The glucose/reactants interacts with or The role of the proteins is to come together andpasses through proteinstransform glucose into starch. -- WISE ID 137040(S) StarchS1. The rice plant has/produces highnutrition starchThe starch inside of the Endosperm cell inside hashigh nutrition. -- WISE ID 136929Non-MechanisticExplainersPartial MechanisticExplainersMechanistic ExplainersTable 3: KI rubric for explanations of the trait expression mechanism in rice plantsKI ScoreCharacteristics of Model-basedExplanationsStudent Examples5 | ComplexIntegrationDESCRIBE KEY INTERACTIONS ofNON-OBSERVABLE cellular structuresand functions that comprise the traitexpression MECHANISM .The way the rice plant is high nutrition is when the highnutrition allele sends messengers to the ribosomes andthe ribosomes makes protein and the protein makesstarch and forms in a granule. -- WISE ID 1368994 | FullIntegrationDESCRIBE the one (1) KEYINTERACTION of NONOBSERVABLE cellular structures andfunctions that comprise the traitexpression MECHANISMInside the nucleus, the high nutrition alleles are locatedin the chromosome. From there, the messengerstransport genetic material to the ribosomes. Then theribosome turns the genetic material into proteins. -WISE ID 1374023 | PartialIntegrationDESCRIBE the RELATIONSHIPbetween the FUNCTION of NONOBSERVABLE cellular STRUCTURESof the trait expression mechanism--OR-Partially DESCRIBE the KEYINTERACTIONS of NONOBSERVABLE cellular structures andfunctions that comprise the traitexpression MECHANISMThe alleles tell the ribosomes to make protein andstarch to make the high nutrition cells. -- WISE ID136847The first thing that will happen is the messenger willhelp the ribosome produce proteins. Then the proteinwill produce starch. -- WISE ID 1372632 | Isolated,IDENTIFY NON-OBSERVABLENon-observable cellular structures of the trait expressionmechanismInside of a rice plant the allele combination, proteins,messengers, and ribosomes all work together andproduce High Nutrition. -- WISE ID 1368251 | Isolated,ObservableIDENTIFY OBSERVABLEcharacteristics or traitsThe farmer can use IKI to indicate whether or not it’shigh or low in nutrition. -- WISE ID 1372650 | Incorrect orIrrelevantOnly incorrectly IDENTIFY, DESCRIBE In a rice plant there is starch, and starch is a complexRELATIONSHIPS, or INTERACTIONS carbohydrate and it turns to sugar in the body, whichacts as an energy boost. -- WISE ID 136930of model elementsICLS 2016 Proceedings214© ISLSAnalysisThe KI analysis provided evidence about the range of model-based explanations among students. Given theformative design of the Idea Manager, we compared composite scores for idea basket and organizing space todifferentiate how students engaged in the interrelated STEM practices: use a model and construct an explanationto deepen their disciplinary content -- trait expression mechanism in rice plants.FindingsThe two teachers in this study implemented the Grade 7 STEMGenetics unit with fidelity. Students completed thedesigned learning activities; they added a mean of 18.71 ideas to their idea baskets during the two activities(SD=6.41). No statistically significant differences in total ideas added were detected between higher and lowerperforming students as measured by their KI score. However, we did notice a significant difference in the qualityof the ideas as explained further below.Knowledge integration of the trait expression mechanismAcross both classrooms, 99 student teams scored a mean of 2.21 for their explanation of trait expression (SD=1.52). We grouped student teams into three significantly different categories: non-mechanistic explainers (KIscore 0-2), partial mechanistic explainers (KI score 3), and mechanistic explainers (KI score 4-5), [t(53)=-14.354,p<.001; t(16)=-11.785, p<.001].The 54 student teams categorized as non-mechanistic explainers identified only (a) observablecharacteristics or features (e.g., rice plant is high nutrition) or (b) non-observable cellular structures that comprisethe trait expression mechanism (e.g., alleles or ribosomes). The explanations of the 28 student teams in the partialmechanistic explainers category either (a) describe the structure-function relationship of at least one nonobservable cellular structure of the trait expression mechanism (e.g., ribosomes create proteins) or (b) partiallydescribe the key interactions of non-observable cellular structures and functions that comprise the trait expressionmechanism (e.g., messenger helps ribosomes create proteins, which produce starch). In the mechanistic explainerscategory, 17 student teams fully describe at least one key interaction of non-observable cellular structures andfunctions that comprise the trait expression mechanism (e.g., messenger carries genetic material from the allelesto ribosomes; ribosomes create proteins, which produce starch).Using a model to construct an explanation of trait expressionOverall, students added a mean of 3.01 (SD=2.27) normative ideas to their idea baskets when they observed adynamic scientific model and were prompted to add ideas about specific elements of the trait expressionmechanism in three steps of the two learning activities. Despite a small difference in the total number of basketideas, non-mechanistic explainers differed significantly in the mean number of normative ideas (2.33, SD=2.04)added to their idea baskets compared to the partial mechanistic (3.61, SD=1.77, t=-2.931, p=0.005) andmechanistic (4.18, SD=2.96, t=-2.393 p=0.026) explainers (Figure 2). The addition of normative model ideasacross all coherence groups suggests the modeling steps scaffold students to (a) attend to the structure, functionand interactions of the non-observable cellular structures of the trait expression mechanism and (b) add normativeideas about these mechanistic elements to their idea baskets.Student teams who constructed a more mechanistic scientific explanation (KI scores 3-5) about the traitexpression mechanism added a mean of 1.28 to 1.85 more normative model ideas to their idea baskets than thenon-mechanistic explainers. This suggests that non-mechanistic explainers may have struggled more than otherstudents to correctly identify the structure, function, and interactions of the non-observable cellular structuresrepresented in the trait mechanism model.During the Explanation Builder step, student teams selected relevant ideas from their idea baskets toplace in the organizing space. Overall, student teams placed a mean of 1.78 (SD=1.78) normative model ideas intheir organizing space. Again, the non-mechanistic explainers differed significantly in the number of normativemodel ideas (1.28, SD=1.70) placed in the organizing space compared to the partial mechanistic (2.32, SD=1.61,t=-2.730, p=0.008) and mechanistic (2.47, SD=1.87, t=-2.339 p=0.028) explainers (Figure 2). Students whoconstructed a more mechanistic scientific explanation about trait expression (KI scores 3-5) placed 1.04-1.09 morenormative ideas in the organizing space. These students had more normative ideas about the mechanistic elementsavailable in their idea baskets during the Explanation Builder step where they distinguished and sorted theserelevant ideas into scientific explanations of the trait expression mechanism.ICLS 2016 Proceedings215© ISLSFigure 2. Differences among explainers when engaged in a set of interrelated STEM practices: use a model toconstruct a scientific explanation.Despite the significant difference in the KI scores among partial mechanistic and mechanistic explainers,these students did not differ significantly in the number of normative model ideas added to their idea baskets orplaced in their organizing space. This finding suggests that these students engaged similarly in the STEM practice,use a model, to identify the mechanistic elements in trait expression. Yet, mechanistic explainers may be betterable to (a) understand the relationship between mechanistic elements represented in the trait expression model or(b) sort their distinguished ideas into a coherent mechanistic explanation of trait expression.Conclusions and implicationsOur coordination of the KI and ECD design frameworks afforded the opportunity to design instruction based onthe Idea Manager tool for integrated STEM learning of content and practices. Embedded in the Grade 7STEMGenetics unit, this formative learning tool engaged students in the observation of dynamic scientific modelsof the trait expression mechanism in rice plants. Students were prompted to document their observations by addingideas to their idea baskets about the non-observable structures, functions, and interactions that comprise the traitexpression mechanism. Later, the organizing space within the Idea Manager tool prompted students to distinguishand sort the ideas in their idea basket, in order to construct a written explanation for how the trait expressionmechanism yields the high-nutrition trait in rice plants.The findings from this study delineated three tiers of students who differed in their abilities to use amodel and construct an explanation, and their integrated understanding of the disciplinary content -- traitexpression (Figure 2). These documented differences in student learning revealed opportunities for (a) teachersand tools to differentiate scaffolds that engage students in STEM practices and (b) refinement of the IdeaManager’s design features to generate more nuanced formative evidence for how students use a model to constructan explanation.Non-mechanistic explainers demonstrated limited use of the trait expression models. They added aninsufficient number of normative model ideas to their idea baskets, indicating a limited understanding of modelelements. They articulated isolated ideas about observable traits or non-observable structures in their explanationof the trait expression mechanism, which was likely due to the limited availability of normative model ideas intheir idea baskets. These findings suggest that non-mechanistic explainers need differentiated scaffolding to addnormative model ideas to their idea baskets so that they are made visible to students when it is time to distinguishand sort relevant ideas into scientific explanations. Also, these students likely need scaffolding beyond thestructure-specific prompts during model steps, such as computer-aided or teacher feedback about the contents oftheir idea baskets.Both partial mechanistic and mechanistic explainers demonstrated requisite use of the trait expressionmodels, indicating an understanding of model elements. These students differed in their ability to construct anexplanation. The mechanistic explainers demonstrated a higher ability to construct an explanation as evidencedby articulation of key interactions of structure and functions that comprise a mechanism, indicating an integrateddisciplinary content knowledge of trait expression. Alternately, partial mechanistic explainers articulated nonobservable structure-function relationships or partial interactions of structures and functions that comprise theICLS 2016 Proceedings216© ISLStrait expression mechanism. This is likely due to partial understanding of the key interactions in a mechanism.Differences in how students understand the relationship between mechanistic elements might become moreevident when students construct an explanation that characterizes the trait expression mechanism. These findingssuggest the need for (a) additional scaffolding in the organizing space to help students organize and sort theirideas into a coherent scientific explanation and (b) refinement of the Idea Manager tasks to elicit evidence ofstudents’ abilities to describe the relationships between model elements and the correspondence to the traitexpression mechanism. For example, we could redesign the organizing space to use a sequential organizingprinciple and help students organize their normative model ideas into the trait expression mechanism.The implications of this study extend beyond the disciplinary content in Grade 7 Genetics and theinterrelated STEM practices, use a model and construct an explanation. Formative learning tools, like the IdeaManager and Explanation Builder, can provide intermediary artifacts for teachers and researchers to (a) identifywhich practices challenge students most and (b) analyze formative evidence to determine how to best to providescaffolds and adjust instruction. In addition, the Idea Manger could be used to distinguish proficiencies betweendifferent sets of interrelated STEM practices, such as analyzing and interpreting data and engaging in argumentfrom evidence. Further design and study of formative learning tools will advance more nuanced understanding oflearning design that can support learning of STEM content and practices.ReferencesBell, P. (2004). The educational opportunities of contemporary controversies in science. In M. Linn, E. Davis &P. Bell (Eds.), Internet environments for science education (pp. 233-260). Mahwah, NJ: LawrenceErlbaum Associates.Bransford, J., A. Brown, & R. Cocking. (2000). How People Learn" Brain, Mind, Experience, and School.Washington, DC: National Academy Press.Debarger, A., Tate, E. D., Beauvineau, Y., Feng, M., Shank, P., Heck, T., and Williams, M. (2014). A designinquiry: Bridging assessment and curriculum frameworks to engage students in science practices. InInternational Perspectives in the Learning Sciences: Proceedings of the 11th International Conferenceof the Learning Sciences. Boulder, Colorado: International Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc.Kali, Y., Linn, M. C., & Roseman, J. E. (2008). Designing Coherent Science Education: Implications forCurriculum, Instruction, and Policy. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.Erduran, S., & Dagher, Z. (2014). Reconceptualizing the nature of science for science education: Scientificknowledge, practices and other family categories. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer.Ford, M. J. (2015). Educational implications of choosing “practice” to describe science in the Next GenerationScience Standards. Science Education, 99(6), 1041-1048.Lee, H. - S., Linn, M. C., Varma, K., & Liu, O. L. (2010). How do technology-enhanced inquiry science unitsimpact classroom learning? Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 47(1), 71–90.Linn, M. C. & Eylon, B-S. (2006). Science education: Integrating views of learning and instruction. In P.A.Alexander and P. H. Winne (Eds.), Handbook of Educational Psychology, (2nd Ed., pp. 511-544).Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.McElhaney, K., Matuk, C., Miller, D., & Linn, M. (2012). Using the idea manager to promote coherentunderstanding of inquiry investigations. In International Perspectives in the Learning Sciences: TheFuture of Learning: Proceedings of the 10th International Conference of the Learning Sciences.Sydney, NSW, AUSTRALIA: International Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc.Mislevy, R. J., & Haertel, G. D. (2006). Implications for evidence-centered design for educational testing.Educational Measurement: Issues and Practices, 25, 6-20.National Research Council (NRC). (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscuttingconcepts, and core ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For states, by states. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Slotta, J. D. & Linn, M. C. (2009). WISE Science: Web-Based Inquiry in the Classroom. New York: TeachersCollege Press.Stroupe, D. (2015). Describing “Science Practice” in Learning Settings. Science Education, 99(6), 1033-1040.AcknowledgmentsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant Number DRL1119055. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those ofthe authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.ICLS 2016 Proceedings217© ISLS