On the Adoption of Social Network Analysis Methodsin CSCL Research – A Network AnalysisMarielle Dado, Tobias Hecking, Daniel Bodemer, and H. Ulrich Hoppemarielle.dado@uni-due.de, hecking@collide.info, bodemer@uni-due.de, hoppe@collide.infoUniversity of Duisburg-EssenAbstract: Originating from mathematical sociology, social network analysis (SNA) is a methodfor analyzing and representing relational structures in online communities. SNA applications inlearning settings and CSCL scenarios are growing in popularity, which is in-line with new trendsin learning analytics. For the CSCL research community, the adoption of SNA techniques aspart of the methodological repertoire requires adequate understanding of the core concepts, theirpotential contributions, and limitations. We started from the hypotheses that (1) mostapplications of SNA in CSCL research make use of a small set of basic methods; and (2) thediscourse related to SNA is partly inadequate or imprecise. To further analyze and corroboratethese “issue hypotheses” we have used network analysis techniques in order to reveal relationsbetween SNA measures and specific aspects of CSCL research (activities, contexts, researchmethods) based on a corpus of 90 published studies. Based on the results we pinpoint specificissues and outline new opportunities.IntroductionThe methodological foundation of CSCL creates a genuine interest in computational methods to analyze andformally represent relevant characteristics of learning groups and communities based on large amounts of digitaldata (e.g., log files) collected in technology-enhanced learning settings (Jeong, Hmelo-Silver, & Yu, 2014). Rootedin sociological studies of communities, social network analysis (SNA) provides a well-defined and elaboratemathematical apparatus that resonates with theoretical models based on actor-actor and actor-artefact relations(Wasserman & Faust, 1994). The adoption of SNA in CSCL started more than 15 years ago (Nurmela, Lehtinen& Palonen, 1999; Reffay & Chanier, 2003). Originally, networks derived from email and discussion boards werethe most prominent type studied, such as the study of cohesion in learning groups using a shared forum (Reffay& Chanier, 2003). Martínez et al. (2003) present an evaluation method that combines SNA with traditional sourcesof data and analyses in blended collaborative learning scenarios. More recently, the interest in network analysistechniques related to the study of learning with CSCL and online learning as particular cases has been strengthenedby the emergence of learning analytics as a new research paradigm (Haya et al., 2015).Given the existing usage of SNA in CSCL research, it is not surprising that such methods have beensubject to meta-level analyses. One example is a co-citation network analysis of CSCL studies from 2006 to 2013by Tang, Tsai, & Lin (2014) which found that the most widely cited works in the field pertain to issues regardingCSCL communication and interaction patterns. Social interaction has been referred to as the “key” to collaborativelearning: “If there is collaboration then social interaction can be found in it… if there is no social interaction thenthere is also no real collaboration” (Kreijns, Kirschner, & Jochems, 2003, p. 338). Interactions characterized as“collaborative” do not merely refer to how frequently peers in a joint activity interact, but also to how influentialthese interactions are in their cognitive processes (Dillenbourg, 1999). Suthers and colleagues consider thefundamental basis of CSCL interactions as the relationship present when one actor’s learning activities buildsupon that of another actor (Suthers et al., 2010).Similarly, from the social network perspective, social relations are more important for understanding thebehavior of groups and communities than individual attributes. In a group, actions and beliefs are stronglydetermined by social contexts and conditions (Wasserman & Faust, 1994). In this sense, the perspectives of CSCLand SNA coincide in focusing on social relations that go beyond individual characteristics. CSCL considerslearning as a social endeavor, occurring as a result of relationships among learners and between learners andobjects in the learning environment (Jones, 2015). By interacting, communicating, and sharing knowledge viacomputers, learners form “computer-supported social networks” from which learning emerges throughconstructive information exchange (Haythornthwaite, 1999). A social network approach to CSCL would thus helpresearchers and practitioners answer the questions: How is information distributed among learners? How muchdoes the group share its information? What media supports this collaboration?CSCL research has a vibrant, interdisciplinary research tradition that incorporate both qualitative andquantitative techniques (Jeong et al, 2014). SNA itself is also not exclusively one or the other, a trait that has beenCSCL 2017 Proceedings287© ISLSan attractive incentive for educational researchers with regards to quantifying social phenomena (Carolan, 2014).Nevertheless, the adoption of SNA methods requires a certain degree of familiarity with mathematical conceptsfrom graph theory and network algorithms, similar to foundations of quantitative-empirical research in statistics.Yet, even after overcoming this first barrier, the new concepts have to be appropriated and integrated with the“CSCL epistemology” so that “technical” SNA are smoothly inter-related with pedagogical interpretations. Thebridges that we use in this context should be sound and precise, not just surface-level shortcuts. One example ofa problematic bridge is the notion of “interaction pattern” that is frequently mentioned in conjunction with SNAstudies. Also, without a deeper understanding of the formal-analytic background a large part of the potential ofSNA may remain unexploited.To empirically study and corroborate these “issue hypotheses”, we have applied network analysistechniques to a corpus of publications at the intersection of CSCL and SNA to detect and visualize relationsbetween SNA measures and procedures and specific aspects of CSCL research. These networks encode conceptconcept relations based on co-occurrence extracted from the abstracts and the results of publications which werepreviously subjected to a qualitative literature review. The concepts have been categorized, which allows forintroducing a cross-category perspective in the form of multi-mode networks. The themes and trends that emergedfrom this analysis are then evaluated based on technical definitions of the SNA techniques and may serve as aspringboard for researchers to (1) understand how CSCL research is currently viewed through the lens of SNAand (2) identify opportunities to apply underexplored SNA techniques to expand the current knowledge base inCSCL.Data sample and qualitative findingsThe application of SNA in education research has grown in the last decade. However, relative to other researchmethods, the use of SNA in CSCL settings is not as well-established. A recent review of SNA in a related field,e-learning research (Cela, Sicilia, & Sanchez, 2015), revealed that SNA is mostly applied to study directinteractions between learners collaborating in online discussion forums based on communication patterns; theseare usually measured using density and centrality indices. SNA is also often combined with qualitative contentanalysis to provide a deeper understanding of the nature of learner interaction within the network. The reviewhowever is preliminary and limited in that the general search term “e-learning” may have excluded relevant studiesthat use more specific terminology (e.g., CSCL).In order to uncover trends in the application of SNA in CSCL research, a qualitative literature reviewwas conducted. Ninety full-text studies published as peer-reviewed journal articles, book chapters, and conferencepapers were collected from October to November 2015 using the following keywords: social network analysis"AND "computer-supported collaborative learning" online OR computer OR collaborat* (e.g., “collaborative” and“collaboration”) OR learning. To be included in the analysis, studies must: (1) use primary data; (2) be set in aninstructional course/program up to the postgraduate (Masters) level; (3) use SNA techniques, explicitly mentionedin the Methods section; (4) report SNA findings in the Results section; and (5) analyze collaborative learningactivities between learners using computers. Information on the general methodology (research design, learningsetting, collaborative activity, non-SNA methods) and SNA features (actor type, relational tie, SNA measures andanalysis on SNA data) were identified in each paper and quantified using content analysis.Similar to the findings of Cela et al (2015) in the e-learning literature, between 50% to 70% of theanalyzed studies measured interaction as direct communication between learners during project or task-basedactivities in blended learning settings, primarily using centrality and density indices. About a quarter of papersconducted content analysis to supplement SNA findings, although analyses of SNA data in most studies werelimited to a descriptive report of the SNA indices. More sophisticated SNA procedures, such as identifyingnetwork positions and detecting cliques and subgroups, appeared in less than 20% of studies. A handful of studiesconducted correlational analysis or inferential statistics on SNA and learner characteristics to enhance theimplications of network data on learning.These results suggest that applications of SNA in CSCL research are rather homogenous, dominated bythe basic local and global measures of centrality and density as indicators of social interaction in CSCLenvironments. Although SNA is a promising method for analyzing collaborative learning in computer-mediatedsettings, the qualitative literature review lends support to the hypothesis that the analysis of CSCL interactionsusing SNA may not be adequate due to the limited range of applied SNA measures. In the present paper, weextend the qualitative results by exploring which CSCL activities, contexts, and research methods are associatedwith which SNA measures and procedures, using network analysis as a technique for meta-level literature analysis(cf. Tang et al, 2014).CSCL 2017 Proceedings288© ISLSMethodologyIn network text analysis (NTA) words or concepts are linked by relations based on proximity of occurrence in atext, manual coding, or grammar relations. By extracting terms in a set of texts and constructing a network basedon how these terms relate to each other, NTA aims at preserving the conceptual structure of texts. More recently,NTA has also been applied to model and visualize the conceptual structure of learners within a knowledge domainbased on questions and answers (Daems, Erkens, Malzahn, & Hoppe, 2014). When used in this manner, NTAcould be considered automated technique for classical content analysis (Diesner & Carley, 2005). Our NTAapproach is based on the network extraction pipeline used in state of the art NTA tools, such as Tools Automap(Diesner & Carley, 2005) and ConText (Diesner, 2014), and comprises three main steps: (1) concept identification,(2) concept normalization and classification, and (3) relation extraction.First, the abstracts and the results section of the papers were prepared for analysis by removing nonrelevant words (articles, auxiliary verbs, etc.) and stemming by removing suffixes. Then, parts-of-speechidentification was done to identify nouns, adverbs and adjectives that represent concepts in the literature. Theextraction process produced 3,057 unigrams (single nouns) and 38,934 bi-grams (two terms, combination ofnouns, adjectives and adverbs), from which the top 150 unigrams and bigrams were included in the next step.Table 1: Codebook exampleTermknowledge constructionconstruction of knowledgeonline coursecontent analysisbetweenness centralityConceptKNOWLEDGE_ CONSTRUCTIONKNOWLEDGE_ CONSTRUCTIONONLINE_COURSECONTENT_ANALYSISBETWEENNESS_ CENTRALITYCategoriesCSCL_ACTIVITYCSCL_ACTIVITYCSCL_CONTEXTCSCL_METHODSNAAn excerpt of the codebook used to identify and classify concepts in the pool of studies is displayed onTable 1. The first column contains concrete terms occurring in the texts. To account for different spellings andsynonyms, the second column maps the specific terms in the first column to a general concept. The third columnassigns each concept to one of the four categories: (1) “CSCL activity” for terms associated with aspects of acollaborative learning activity (e.g., “knowledge building”, “score”); (2) “CSCL context” for terms pertaining tophysical/virtual settings or platforms where CSCL activities take place (e.g., “class”, “forum”); (3) “CSCLmethod” for terms pertaining to other analysis methods applied alongside SNA (e.g., “correlation”); (4) “SNA”,for terms related to SNA procedures and techniques (e.g., “centrality”). After combining synonyms and spellingvariations, the final analysis included 101 concepts: 22 SNA, 45 CSCL activity, 23 CSCL context, 11 CSCLmethod. Figure 1 shows how the codebook is used to automatically identify and classify the concepts in text.Figure 1. Concept identification, normalization and classification.(purple: CSCL_ACTIVITY, blue: CSCL_CONCEPT, orange: CSCL_method, blue: CSCL: CONTEXT, green: SNA)Once the CSCL and SNA concepts have been identified, the next step is to extract a concept networkthat reflects the associations made between the different concepts in the selected CSCL literature. First, for eachpublication the identified concepts from the codebook are interlinked to a fully connected network (or conceptclique). Second, the concept cliques corresponding to particular publications are merged by overlaying thesenetworks such that the result is a single network which contains all concepts and all links from the originalnetworks. It is important to mention that in order to account for the relationships between SNA and CSCL abipartite version of the network was used, which restricts the original one to having edges solely between SNAand CSCL concepts. The weight of each edge between two concepts corresponds to the number of concept cliquescontaining this edge, i.e., the number of papers in which the concepts co-occur.CSCL 2017 Proceedings289© ISLSThe resulting edge-weighted and bipartite network together with the category attributes of nodes is thebasis for our further analyses. In particular, we analyze the network in terms of distance between concepts andcohesive clusters, which will be described in more detail in the following section.Analysis and resultsFor a first overview we provide a frequency count of the number of publications mentioning the 22 SNA concepts.The result shown in Figure 2 supports the findings of the qualitative literature review that the usage of SNA inCSCL research is mostly restricted to centrality analysis. The most basic measure “degree centrality” appears inthe abstracts and result sections of 70 of the 90 papers. In contrast, more advanced techniques such as modularityof sub-communities, positional analysis using blockmodels, or network simulation are rarely mentioned.Figure 2. Number of occurrences of different SNA concepts in the 90 documents.To further investigate the contexts in which particular SNA concepts are applied, the previous findingsare extended by identifying for each SNA concept the closest CSCL concepts based on geodesic distance in theconcept network. The edge weights (i.e., number of co-occurrences) of concepts were taken into account by settingthe edge distance between connected concepts to the inverse of its weight.Table 2: Profiles of SNA concepts based on proximities to different types of CSCL conceptsSNADegree CentralityCentralityDensityOutdegree CentralityIndegree CentralityCSCL Activitygroupwork, interaction, helpCSCL Contextcourse, message, classgroupwork, interaction, communicationCentral Positiongroupwork, interaction, roleBetweenness Centralitygroupwork, interaction, discussionCentralizationgroupwork, interaction, communicationCloseness CentralityCliqueNetwork StructureReciprocitySubgroup Detectiongroupwork, help, interactionCommunicationNetworkcommunication, groupwork, interactionCSCL 2017 Proceedingsmessage, course, postgroupwork, interaction, communicationcourse, message, classcourse, message, postcourse, message, classCSCL Methodinteraction_pattern, correlation,questionnairecorrelation, content_analysis,interaction_patterninteraction_pattern, correlation,questionnairecontent_analysis, correlation,interaction_patterncorrelation, interaction_pattern,questionnairecontent_analysis,interaction_pattern, correlationcorrelation, interaction_pattern,questionnairegroupwork, interaction, help290© ISLSNetwork Connectivitygroupwork, communication, helpNetwork Measuregroupwork, discussion, interactionEigenvector Centralitygroupwork, help, interactionBlockmodellingcommunication, groupwork, discussioncourse,discussion_forum,messageclass, post, coursecommunication, groupwork,participationcourse, message, classModularitySimulation Modelstime_period, interaction_pattern,correlationTable 2 lists for all SNA concepts the three closest CSCL concepts of each category (Activity, Context,Method) yielding characteristic profiles of the SNA concepts in terms of their proximity to CSCL concepts.“Groupwork”, “interaction”, and “communication” as CSCL activities are the closest to most SNA terms, whichsuggests that interactions within CSCL group activities are often characterized by communication. The proximityof the concept “help” to the node- and group-centric SNA concepts (e.g., centrality, clique) suggests that help orsupport are mostly associated with positions of individuals in a social network. In the CSCL method category,“correlation analysis” and “questionnaire” alongside “interaction pattern” appeared in almost every profile. Aswas found in the qualitative literature review, this indicates that SNA is commonly used in combination withempirical data collected from questionnaires to relate structural network properties to quantitative measures oflearning. Simulation models for social networks constitute the only SNA concept that is closely related to time(“time_period” in the category CSCL Method).Next, we have specifically analyzed the relation between SNA concepts and CSCL concepts in terms ofcohesive bipartite network clusters to reveal the inherent organization of the complex network. Cohesive clustersin such a network stand for subgroups or clouds of terms that are more densely connected among each other thanthe average of the network. This cohesiveness can be characterized by the “modularity” measure (cf. Barber,2007), here particularly using bipartite modularity maximization (Hecking, Steinert, Göhnert, & Hoppe, 2014).The clustered network representation shown in Figure 3 results from the following workflow: (1) filtering out of“weak” edges with weight below 8; (2) further reduction of the network to its 2-core to ensure that the remainingnodes are connected to at least 2 others (no singular or satellite nodes); (3) identification of mixed clusters of SNAand CSCL concepts based on bipartite modularity; (4) visualization, as presented in Figure 3. The color of thenodes indicates cluster association and node size is scaled according to its degree in the weighted network. Theshapes of the nodes represent the different categories.CSCL 2SNA 3SNA 1CSCL 1SNA 2CSCL 3Figure 3. Result of the bipartite modularity optimization.( • - CSCL activities, ♦ - CSCL research methods, ✙ - CSCL context, ⬛ - SNA concepts)CSCL 2017 Proceedings291© ISLSThe applied clustering algorithm identifies two clusters. The network is very densely connected, howeverinteresting relational patterns between different parts of the network are salient. The blue cluster can be furtherdivided into three groups of concepts indicated by the ellipses in Figure 3. The group “CSCL 1” contains generalCSCL activities that are almost solely linked to the most common SNA concepts (SNA 1) and not to third bluegroup (CSCL 2), which in turn is strongly connected to the SNA concepts in its cluster (SNA 1) as well as in theother cluster (SNA 2). A similar pattern can be discovered for the green cluster. Here there is a group of SNAconcepts (SNA 3) that is almost completely separated from the blue cluster. The concepts in this group can beconsidered as less common compared to the other SNA concepts in the network. The green cluster further containsSNA concepts (SNA 2) and CSCL concepts (CSCL 3) that act as bridges between the two large concept clusters.The distinction between groups of concepts based on “strong” connections to groups within the same cluster and“weak” connections to groups of the other cluster can be used to reveal the overall relational structure of SNAand CSCL concepts in the investigated literature. This macro-structure is shown in Table 3, which is also calledan image matrix (Wasserman & Faust, 1994). Image matrices depict the presence or absence of pre-definedrelations (here weak, strong, or absent) between different parts of a network and can be considered as acharacteristic to help interpret the inherent organization of a given networkTable 3: Relationships between different parts of the concept network as image matrixSNA 1 (blue cluster)SNA 2 (green cluster)SNA 3 (green cluster)CSCL 1 (blue cluster)strongabsentabsentCSCL 2 (blue cluster)strongweakabsentCSCL 3 (green cluster)weakstrongstrongSNA concepts in SNA 1 (indegree/outdegree centrality, centrality, degree centrality) and CSCL 3 (e.g.,course, post, collaborative_learning, groupwork), are interlinked to most parts of the network, and can beconsidered as the conceptual core of the usage of SNA in CSCL research. Note that the terms in CSCL 3 are thesame as the CSCL terms that appear in the proximity analysis in Table 2. The least connected CSCL group (CSCL2) pertain to specific environments (e.g., blogs), pedagogical approaches (e.g., knowledge building), or processes(e.g., engagement); these are studied using most common SNA indices of centrality and density (SNA 1).Similarly, the least connected SNA group (SNA 3) contains techniques that are less frequently applied; this clusteris only associated with the most prominent CSCL concepts (CSCL 3).DiscussionOverall the analyses presented in this paper demonstrate a visible relational structure and conceptual core of SNAand CSCL activities, contexts, and methods that are present in the CSCL literature. The profiles generated usingnetwork analysis techniques corroborate the findings of the qualitative literature review, namely that SNAapplications in CSCL research aim to understand CSCL “interaction patterns” based on communication. This wasthe case for all SNA indices included in the analysis and not only the most frequently used indices of centralityand density. The results also show that there have been efforts to associate these interaction patterns with learningrelated variables using statistical methods (correlation), which could be seen as a way of bridging researchperspectives between CSCL and education traditions (Carolan, 2014). In this section we critically discuss the coreCSCL concept of “interaction patterns” in relation to the technical underpinnings of the core SNA indices.Given the high connectivity of “interaction” and “communication” to the most prominent SNA conceptsin our pool of studies, one might think that “interaction pattern” is a technical term derived from SNA. However,the basic SNA measures that were used frequently in our sample, especially centrality measures but also subgroupdetection methods, only characterize relational attributes based on the connectivity of single nodes (actors), subnetworks, or the entire network. Centralization and reciprocity are global measures that indeed reveal certaingeneral network characteristics and can characterize the topology of communication in networked learningenvironments. This can be conceived as a certain type of structural-relational pattern, but it is not about repeatedconcrete constellations, especially not in a temporal sense. The SNA technique of blockmodeling would be ameans of detecting roles and role models based on consistent network structures and relational similarity.However, as our results show, it has been rarely used in CSCL studies.Furthermore, single instances of social networks do not represent time-dependent relations, but rathercapture and aggregate relations harvested during a given time window. Hoppe, Harrer, Göhnert, Hecking (2016)have made the point that the choice of different time windows as a step prior to the network generation can havesystematic effects on the ensuing analysis results. While SNA research has developed several ways to handledynamic networks that evolve over time (Aggarwal & Subbian, 2014), such techniques are not widely adopted inCSCL 2017 Proceedings292© ISLSCSCL: the only indication of considering time dependencies in combination with CSCL concepts was related tonetwork simulation models, which is one of the least common SNA methods in our results. Since it has beenargued that the explicit consideration of temporal processes is crucial to make sense of data produced in CSCLenvironments (Reimann, 2009), a future advancement of SNA in CSCL can be to consider dynamic networkanalysis methods based on time series of graphs.All this indicates that the notion of “interaction patterns” as measured in SNA is indeed not very specificin a technical sense: what constitutes “interaction patterns” is not strictly operationalized in SNA. Thus, the actualtechnical definitions of SNA measures should be clarified when interpreting SNA findings. The SNA concept of“density”, the third frequent in our list of SNA concepts is another example for potential issues: There is a generalcaveat concerning the usage of density as a comparative measure applied to networks of different sizes (includinggrowing networks). Density as a general measure for graphs is equal to the average degree divided by the numberof nodes in the graph. On the other hand, in most naturally evolving networks the average degree will grow (if atall) at a much lower rate than the number of nodes. For scale-free networks (Barabasi & Bonabeau, 2003) theaverage degree is inherently constant. This means that the smallest networks will have the highest density. Hoppe,Engler & Weinbrenner (2012) have discussed this effect when studying student-generated concept maps. Thismakes it difficult to definitively identify an “optimal” density level of communication in CSCL research, whereunits of analysis tend to vary in size (Stahl, 2015). Density can be reasonably used as a comparative measure onlywith networks that have an identical number of nodes, otherwise the ratio of number of edges per number of nodes(which is proportional to the average degree) should be used.In sum, the results indicate mismatches between the intended aims of applying SNA in CSCL (i.e., toinvestigate interaction patterns) and the actual technical definitions of SNA concepts even at the most basic level.SNA describes characteristics of network structures based on several common indices, and those descriptions donot necessarily capture consistent patterns of interaction that persist over time and onto other contexts. A numberof sophisticated SNA techniques that are able to accomplish this, such as blockmodeling, measures on time seriesof networks, and network simulations, are largely underexplored.ConclusionThe adoption of SNA techniques in CSCL is very much focused on understanding and modeling “interactionpatterns”. However, we also argue that CSCL “interaction patterns” do not necessarily become apparent from thebasic and most commonly used SNA indices. However, despite SNA originating from a different analyticaltradition, its use in combination with statistical analysis shows how SNA is able to cut through disciplinaryboundaries. We hope that interested CSCL researchers will use our analysis as a basis for expanding the currentknowledge body to include advanced SNA techniques for exploring other network dimensions such as time. Thischallenge would not only contribute to a more nuanced analysis on CSCL interactions, but it would also enrichthe interdisciplinarity of research methods and the skill sets of CSCL researchers. As long as the CSCL communityis interested in the study of social interactions, there is a place for SNA in this research field.ReferencesAggarwal, C., & Subbian, K. (2014). Evolutionary network analysis: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR),47(1), 10. doi:10.1145/2601412.Barabási, A. L., & Bonabeau, E. (2003). Scale-free networks. Scientific American, 288(5), 50-59.Barber, M. J. (2007). Modularity and community detection in bipartite networks. Physical Review E, 76(6),066102. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.76.066102Carolan, B. V. (2014). Social network analysis and education: Theory, methods & applications. California: SagePublications.Cela, K. L., Sicilia, M. A., & Sanchez, S. (2015). Social network analysis in e-Learning environments: Apreliminary systematic review. Educational Psychology Review, 27(1), 219–246. doi:10.1007/s10648014-9276-0.Dillenbourg, P. (1999). What do you mean by “collaborative learning”? In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.), Collaborativelearning: Cognitive and computational approaches (pp. 1–19). Oxford, UK: Elsevier.Daems, O., Erkens, M., Malzahn, N., & Hoppe, H. U. (2014). Using content analysis and domain ontologies tocheck learners’ understanding of science concepts. Journal of Computers in Education, 1(2), 113-131.doi.10.1007/s40692-014-0013-yDiesner, J. (2014). ConText: Software for the integrated analysis of text data and network data. Paper presentedat the Social and Semantic Networks in Communication Research. Preconference at Conference ofInternational Communication Association (ICA), Seattle, WA.CSCL 2017 Proceedings293© ISLSDiesner, J., & Carley, K. M. (2005). Revealing social structure from texts: Meta-matrix text analysis as a novelmethod for network text analysis. In V.K. Narayanan and D. Armstrong (eds.), Causal mapping forinformation systems and technology research (p. 81-108). Hershey, PA: IGI Global.Haythornthwaite, C. (1999). Collaborative work networks among distributed learners. In R. Sprague (ed.),Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences, 1999. HICSS32, Hawaii, US (pp. 1023-39). Virginia, US: IEEE Computer Society Press.doi:10.1109/HICSS.1999.772707Haya, P. A., Daems, O., Malzahn, N., Castellanos, J., & Hoppe, H. U. (2015). Analysing content and patterns ofinteraction for improving the learning design of networked learning environments. British Journal ofEducational Technology, 46(2), 300-316. doi:10.1111/bjet.12264Hecking, T., Steinert, L., Göhnert, T., & Hoppe, H. U. (2014). Incremental clustering of dynamic bipartitenetworks. In Proceedings of the 2 nd European Network Intelligence Conference (ENIC 2014) Wroclaw,Poland (pp. 9-16). Los Alamitos, CA : Conference Publishing Services. doi:10.1109/ ENIC.2014.15Hoppe, H. U., Engler, J., & Weinbrenner, S. (2012). The impact of structural characteristics of concept maps onautomatic quality measurement. In J. van Aalst, K. Thompson, M. Jacobson, and P. Reimann (eds.),Proceedings of the 10 th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2012), Sydney,Australia (pp. 308-316). Sydney: International Society of the Learning Sciences. www.isls.org/icls2012Hoppe, H. U., Harrer, A., Göhnert, T., & Hecking, T. (2016). Applying network models and network analysistechniques to the study of online communities. In U. Cress, J. Moskaliuk, and H. Jeong (eds.), MassCollaboration and Education (pp. 347-366). Switzerland: Springer International Publishing.Jeong, H., Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Yu, Y. (2014). An examination of CSCL methodological practices and theinfluence of theoretical frameworks 2005–2009. International Journal of Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning, 9(3), 305–334. doi:10.1007/s11412-014-9198-3.Jones, C. (2015). Networked learning: an educational paradigm for the age of digital networks. Switzerland:Springer International Publishing.Kreijns, K., Kirschner, P. A., & Jochems, W. (2003). Identifying the pitfalls for social interaction in computersupported collaborative learning environments: A review of the research. Computers in Human Behavior,19(3), 335–353. doi:10.1016/S0747-5632(02)00057-2.Martínez, A., Dimitriadis, Y., Rubia, B., Gómez, E., & De La Fuente, P. (2003). Combining qualitativeevaluation and social network analysis for the study of classroom social interactions. Computers &Education, 41(4), 353-368. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2003.06.001Nurmela, K., Lehtinen, E., & Palonen, T. (1999). Evaluating CSCL log files by social network analysis. In C.Hoadley and J. Roschelle (eds.), Proceedings of the 1999 Conference on Computer Support forCollaborative Learning, article no. 42. International Society of the Learning Sciences.http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1150294.Suthers, D. D., Dwyer, N., Medina, R., & Vatrapu, R. (2010). A framework for conceptualizing, representing, andanalyzing distributed interaction. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning,5(1), 5–42. doi:10.1007/s11412-009-9081-9.Stahl, G. (2015). A decade of CSCL. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning,10(4), 337–344. doi:10.1007/s11412-015-9222-2.Tang, K. Y., Tsai, C. C., & Lin, T. C. (2014). Contemporary intellectual structure of CSCL research (2006–2013):a co-citation network analysis with an education focus. International Journal of Computer-SupportedCollaborative Learning, 9(3), 335–363. doi:10.1007/s11412-014-9196-5.Reffay, C., & Chanier, T. (2003). How social network analysis can help to measure cohesion in collaborativedistance-learning. In B. Wasson, S. Ludvigsen, and H. U. Hoppe (eds.), Designing for change innetworked learning environments (pp. 343-352). Springer Netherlands. doi:10.1007/978-94-017-0195-2Reimann, P. (2009). Time is precious: Variable-and event-centred approaches to process analysis in CSCLresearch. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4(3), 239-257.doi:10.1007/s11412-009-9070-z.Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social network analysis: Methods and applications (Vol. 1). CambridgeUniversity Press.AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under Grant No. GRK 2167, ResearchTraining Group “User-Centred Social Media”.CSCL 2017 Proceedings294© ISLS