Technology-Supported Dialog as a Bridge to DevelopingIndividual Argumentive Thinking and WritingDeanna Kuhn, Teachers College, Columbia University, dk100@columbia.eduWendy Goh, Teachers College, Columbia University, adrwendy@gmail.comAbstract: We describe the rationale, implementation, and outcomes of a multi-year programfeaturing electronic dialog as a tool in developing both discourse skills and individualargumentive thinking and writing in middle-school students. Its theoretical roots lie in thesociocultural tradition, in particular Vygotsky’s view that the inter-mental with practicebecomes interiorized and transformed into the intra-mental. We report on the gains observedamong successive cohorts, relative to close comparison groups who engaged in non-dialogicwhole-class discussion. Gains are seen both in dialogic argumentation and in individual writtenargument, specifically with respect to counterargument and the use of evidence.Keywords: argumentation, technology, discourse, dialog, writing, reasoning, middle schoolIntroductionThe last decade has seen a notable expansion of attention to argument skills as an educational objective, reinforcedby the US Common Core Standards emphasis on non-fiction writing and reading, and, within science, by the USNext Generation Science Standards emphasis on scientific practices, in particular argumentation. Neither set ofstandards, however, specifies how mastery of argument skills is best achieved. We describe a multi-year programfeaturing electronic dialog as a tool in developing argumentive thinking and writing in middle-school students.The program rests on the view that core intellectual skills such as argumentation must be developed in a contextof rich content but are sufficiently important to warrant dedicated attention, rather than being subordinated entirelyto subject matter content goals, where they risk neglect.RationaleWe regard dialogic argumentation as a productive vehicle for developing both individual and dialogic argumentivecompetencies on several grounds. One is the close connection between an individual argument as a product anddialogic argumentation as a process (Billig, 1987). Another is the developmental origins of dialogic argumentationin everyday talk. A third is the ability of dialogic argumentation to provide the “missing interlocutor” (Graff,2003) that often leaves students’ expository writing devoid of purpose.Our approach is consistent with the sociocultural tradition of Vygotsky in taking the everyday socialpractice of dialog as a starting point and pathway for individual development: The inter-mental with practicebecomes interiorized and transformed into the intra-mental. A dialogic approach argumentation has ancientorigins with Socrates and Plato. We draw on the contemporary philosophical work of Walton (1989), whoidentifies two goals of argumentation: to secure commitments from the opponent that can be used to support one’sown argument and to undermine the opponent’s position by identifying and challenging its weaknesses.Skill development requires sustained, dense practice in rich environments that require those skills andvalues. It requires both a supportive community and the strengthening of individual skills and understanding, andhence is not quickly achieved (Kuhn et al., 2013). In contrast to approaches emphasizing explicit instruction asthe key tool in developing critical thinking and writing, our approach is experiential in its pedagogical emphasisand microgenetic with regard to research methodology. By observing students engaged in technology-supportedguided practice, we believe we seek to gain insight into what develops and how.Overview of methodOur initial work documented that young adolescents engaged in argumentation concentrate on exposition of theirown claims, essentially ignoring the opponent’s position. Thus, the initial goals of our program are to encourageattention to the other’s position and to enhance ability and disposition to address it, the objective being to weakenit, or in other words, to engage in counterargumentation. Our focus then shifts to use of evidence to strengthenand weaken claims. By securing answers to their own self-generated questions on the topic, students contributeto a set of evidence that plays an increasing role in their argumentation. Students ask questions so as to create aneed for the information they acquire. They see how such information could be useful in achieving their discourseobjectives, and then we assist them in securing it.ICLS 2016 Proceedings771© ISLSThe recurring sequence of activities and their objectives are summarized in Table 1. The cognitive goalsare not strictly sequential in order and rather are visited and revisited multiple times with new and gradually morecomplex ideas and topics. The core activity is one in which students use chat software to conduct electronicdialogs on a social issue (Fig. 1). They begin with topics close to their own experience, e.g., Should a misbehavingstudent be expelled or given a second chance, and gradually move on to topics of wider scope, e.g., Should organsales be allowed. See Kuhn et al. (2016) for further details.Table 1: Summary of curriculum activities and associated cognitive goalsCurriculum ActivityGenerating reasonsElaborating reasonsEvaluating reasonsDeveloping reasons into an argumentExamining and evaluating opponents’ reasonsGenerating counterarguments to others’ reasonsGenerating rebuttals to others’ counterargumentsSupporting [and weakening] arguments with evidenceContemplating mixed evidenceConducting and evaluating two-sided argumentsConstructing a [written or oral] individual argumentCognitive GoalReasons underlie opinions. Different reasons exist for the sameopinion.Good reasons support opinions.Some reasons are better than others.Reasons connect to one another and are building blocks ofargument.Opponents have reasons too.Reasons can be countered.Counters to reasons can be rebutted.Evidence can strengthen claims. It can also weaken claims.The same evidence can be used to support or weaken differentclaims.The same claim can be supported or weakened by different piecesof evidenceOpposing positions must be weighed in a framework ofalternatives and evidence.An individual argument can be constructed from a dialogicargument.Figure 1. Topic workflow from pregame to final essay (from Kuhn et al., 2013).Discourse is electronic to facilitate reflection on it. Students work in same-side pairs to promoteexternalization of and reflection on their thinking, with each pair conducting electronic dialogs with a series ofopposing-side pairs. Over 13 class sessions devoted to a single topic, same-side team work precedes and followsICLS 2016 Proceedings772© ISLSthe dialogs. The sequence culminates in a whole-class “Showdown” debate, debrief, and individual position essays(Fig. 1). The major way we support students’ thinking is by externalizing it, making it more visible. Doing soincreases awareness of their own and others’ thinking, a first step in enabling them to reflect on it, and, in sodoing, to enrich it. The visible transcript of the dialog allows students to review and reflect on what has been said.This feature stands in striking contrast to face-to-face dialog, where the spoken word disappears once it is uttered,challenging memory capacities.Because the pair must agree in advance on what to communicate to the opposing pair, participation inreasoned discourse is doubled (both verbal within the same-side pair and electronic between opposing pairs) andencourages metacognitive planning and reflection (since the pair must reflect on the opponents’ statements anddebate what to say in return). Other activities based on the dialogs function as additional tools of reflection. Forexample, students are asked to identify the major arguments and their counterarguments and rebuttals, as well asrelevant evidence. These summaries remain available as resources during preparation for the final Showdown andthe Showdown itself, as well as the adult-led debrief analysis that follows.That activities center around peer interchange, rather than whole-class, teacher-directed talk, promotesstudents becoming accountable to one another, as members of a community with evolving group norms. Studentsare constantly on call and cannot assume the passive role of audience. These evolving norms must be constructedwithin the group and gain acceptance by its members, with risk of criticism for violating them. Claims must havereasons and reasons must stand to the challenge of arguments and evidence that can weaken them. Sharedunderstandings evolve regarding acceptable counterarguments and what counts as evidence.ResultsProportioncounterargumentOur assessment of outcomes is based on 12 middle-school classes who participated twice weekly for two to threeyears. Comparison classrooms participated in a parallel twice-weekly class taught by school faculty. This classwas equivalent in time and work investment but followed a more traditional whole-class format, plus writingassignments, but without the pair dialogs, electronic discourse, or structured debates of our curriculum. Initial andfinal assessments of these classes as well allowed for close comparison.At annual assessments a pair who held opposing views on the assessment topic (capital punishment,which was not part of the curriculum) conducted a dialog in writing. These were divided into idea units and eachclassified according to whether it “countered” the opponent’s immediately preceding statement in either of twoways —as a counter-alternative, i.e., one that opposes the statement by proposing an alternative argument, or asthe stronger counter-critique (or direct counter) that opposes the statement and directly critiques it.Proportions of dialog statements classified as counterarguments rose with each yearly assessment amongthe participating group but not the comparison group (Crowell & Kuhn, 2014). (See Figures 2 and 3.) As shown,it is mainly the simpler counter-alternative arguments that become more prevalent during the first year, whilecounter-critiques do not rise until the second year. Least overall gain appears during the third year. Yet, whenthese gains are broken down by initial skill level, the one third of the experimental group that showed least skillat the initial assessment continue to improve during the third year, indicating the program continues to be ofbenefit to them. Indeed, even this initially least able group reached a proportion of direct counterargument ofalmost 50%, almost equal to that of their peers who began with more initial skill. These findings are importantin establishing not only that the curriculum works but does so very well for low-ability students.0.70.650.60.550.50.450.4InterventionWithin SchoolComparisonFigure 2. Mean proportion counterargument use by group and time (from Crowell & Kuhn, 2014).ICLS 2016 Proceedings773© ISLSProportion direct counter0.60.50.40.3Intervention0.2Within SchoolComparison0.10Figure 3. Mean proportion counter-critique use by group and time (from Crowell & Kuhn, 2014).We also saw gains in students’ evaluation of arguments and in their construction of hypothetical twosided dialogic arguments (Kuhn et al., 2013), and the outcome measure of greatest interest to educators, students’individual argumentive essays. We administered at each assessment point a writing assignment on a topic notpart of the curriculum. We kept the topic constant over time, to be able to more precisely gauge students’ gains.Like the dialogic assessments, this assessment was also administered to the comparison classes.At the pretest one third of both groups wrote essays that addressed both sides of the issue (whetherteachers should receive experience-based or equal pay). At the end of year 1, two thirds of the experimentalgroup did so, with no significant change in the comparison group, and at the end of year 2 this percentage rose to79%, again with no improvement in the comparison group (Kuhn & Crowell, 2011). Further development towardan integrative stance (that includes negatives of preferred position or positives of opposing position) did not occuruntil year 3 and only in the experimental group.ConclusionArgument as core curriculum requires not only new approaches but a vision and commitment on the part ofeducators, especially when competing, more traditional objectives infringe on it. Our findings support the viewthat its place as core curriculum is productive and thus justified. The group norms regarding intellectual discoursethat we observe evolve during our curriculum are at first confined to this special context, but hopefully in timebecome familiar enough that students begin to recognize these standards as a powerful and valued mode ofdiscourse observable far beyond their classrooms, one that they are capable of participating in fully, as citizensand in all their individual pursuits.ReferencesBillig, M. (1987). Arguing and thinking: A rhetorical approach to social psychology. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Crowell, A., & Kuhn, D. (2014). Developing dialogic argumentation skills: A 3-year intervention study. Journalof Cognition and Development, 15, 363-381,Graff, G. (2003). Clueless in academe: How schooling obscures the life of the mind. New Haven: Yale UniversityPress.Kuhn, D. (1991). The skills of argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Kuhn, D., & Crowell, A. (2011). Dialogic argumentation as a vehicle for developing young adolescents’ thinking.Psychological Science, 22, 545-552Kuhn, D., Hemberger, L., & Khait, V. (2016). Argue with me: Argument as a path to developing students’ thinkingand writing. New York: Routledge.Kuhn, D., Zillmer, N., Crowell, A., & Zavala, J. (2013). Developing norms of argumentation: Metacognitive,epistemological, and social dimensions of developing argumentive competence. Cognition & Instruction,31, 456-496.Walton, D. N. (1989). Dialogue theory for critical thinking. Argumentation, 3, 169-184.ICLS 2016 Proceedings774© ISLS