Hacking a Path In and Through STEM: Unpacking the STEMIdentity Work of Historically Underrepresented Youth in STEMEdna Tan, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, e_tan@uncg.eduAngela Calabrese Barton, Michigan State University, acb@msu.eduAbstract: In response to the vast inequities minoritized youth experience in STEM, weinvestigate how minoritized youth imagine and author pathways towards becoming in STEM.Drawing from social practice theory, identity and mobiliites of learning, we investigate, throughcritical longitudinal ethnography, how youth hack a pathway in and through STEM as theyremix and repurpose tools, practices, relationships and artifact within and across the STEMrelated worlds in their lives. We present one case study to articulate how youth engaged inpathhacking identity work to both gain access and transform both the process and outcomes ofSTEM participation in both informal programs and school science. The process, salient factorsand implications of pathhacking identity work are discussed.Keywords: identity work, minoritized youth, STEM, equity“When I think of STEM pathways I think of science fairs and stuff. I don’t think I wasever that kind of a person... It makes me feel like an imposter to call my pathway aSTEM pathway.” - Cathy, pre-med university freshmanIntroductionLarge gaps in achievement and interest in engineering and the physical sciences persist for youth growing up inpoverty, and in particular for African American and Latino youth from low-income communities. These gapspersist across all levels of educational attainment. In the United States the percent of bachelor degrees awardedto African Americans in engineering in the U.S. has hovered around 4% (Yoder, 2014). The research literaturedocuments many reasons for these persistent gaps, including inequitable access to resources, quality instructionor role models, along with cultural barriers and stereotypes (Margolis, et al., 2008; Oakes, 2005).Yet, success inthe sciences and engineering is one viable route towards personal and/or community economic advancement foryouth growing up in poverty. It also factors into opportunities for informed, meaningful, and empowereddemocratic participation. That lower-income communities of color experience the greatest levels of environmentalinjustice in the US, and often have the least voice in STEM-related decisions affecting their communities arefurther evidence of the impact of persistent inequities in access to the sciences and engineering (National Academyof Engineering, 2010).Our work is in response to these vast inequities that youth from lower-income communities of color face.We know that institutional and classroom level practices in schooling and society have unfairly positioned lowerincome youth and youth of color as non-experts and outsiders to STEM. Even when such youth succeed in scienceacademically, they disproportionately do not view themselves as having a future in science. Take, for example,Cathy, whose quote opens this paper, is an African American female growing up in a lower-income communityand attending a majority minority school, Cathy performed well in school and earned a full scholarship to college.Later, Cathy points to the people and out of school experiences that kept her in STEM despite not having accessto the more traditional STEM enrichment experiences of the prototypical STEM person. She sees herself as animposter in STEM, one who does not belong, despite her academic success.The overarching question that guides this manuscript is: How do youth imagine and author pathwaystowards becoming in STEM? We use the term “imagine” to capture, as Boal (1974/1979) might say, the placeswhere expectations can become desettled, generating new practices grounded in the world as it is, and the worldas it could be. In particular, we are interested in the ways in which youth navigate their worlds, and author spacesof learning, doing and becoming in STEM. Tensions arise, however, when the different institutional, social,cultural and political forces push back on youth as they work to author these pathways, as Cathy noted in hercomments, causing her to feel like an imposter.Conceptual frameworkWe draw from both social practice theory and mobilities of learning studies to frame identity as constructed insocial interaction, over time, and across many different spatial (physical and virtual) locations. We take as aICLS 2016 Proceedings418© ISLSstarting point the idea that identity is constructed in practice – practice that requires knowledge, skills, and waysof thinking that characterize the community in which one is engaging (Holland, Lachicotte Jr., Skinner, & Cain,2001). Identity is also a highly social and dynamic construct and is related to how individuals are recognized byothers at any given moment, in ways that support or work against who they are and want to be. However, neitherone’s agency to act in particular ways or how one is recognized by others for what one does, are constant. Suchthings can quickly change as individuals move across space and time where their individual and collective actionsare differentially enabled and constrained by social structures-in-motion.We therefore find it more productive to focus on identity work rather than identity itself. By identitywork we refer to the actions that individuals take and the relationships they form towards becoming particularkinds of people. The reception, or recognition, of these positionings by the community highlights the dialecticalnature of identity work. Because identity work happens within and against local norms and expectations and as apart of longer standing sociocultural and historical narratives, its outcomes are always uncertain and gain newmeaning as they get traced in time.Leveraging on a mobilities of learning framework (Engeström & Sannino, 2010; Gutiérrez, 2012) helpsus situate identity work across multiple time scales, different spatial (physical and virtual) locations, and bothvertical and horizontal dimensions. The real and imagined geographies of learning experienced by youth as theywork on, and within, the powered boundaries of science and community, all play into how young people positionthemselves with and against the normative expectations of becoming in science (Bright, Manchester & Allyndale,2013). Studies have documented how individuals navigate and bridge the worlds of home, school, andcommunity, including how they move people, practices, tools, and ideas across these settings (e.g. Ehret & Hollet,2014). These studies remind us that there is continuity between youths’ worlds and that of science and that webest understand these worlds as “generative resources in learning new ideas and traditions of inquiry” (Warren,Ogonowski, & Pothier, 2005, p. 121). They have also led to the recognition that youths’ mobilities among a vastrange of learning arrangements makes learning and identity work always “tangled up” among practices in complexways (Rahm, 2012).Identity work across time and space is one way to understand how youth author paths to possible futuresin STEM. Possible paths are created and facilitated by power-mediated opportunity structures that some youthcan traverse, but others struggle to understand, let alone be welcomed by. Often times, youth-centered actionstowards path authoring are not recognized by traditional structures and gatekeeping authorities (Authors, 2013).A focus on how youth author paths through their identity work highlights the forward trajectory of young learners’decisions and opportunities toward promising possible futures in/with science. Seeing such movement allows fornuanced examinations of the twists and turns a possible path takes throughout individual learning landscapes.How youth choose to engage in science, for what purposes, where and when all shape, and are shaped by, thepeople, places, events, and power structures that constrain or expand activity. This approach also foregrounds themultiple directions one may take with science, the various on/off ramps into/through science, and the agencyyouth have to author within/across the multiple layers and contexts of learning experiences in science.MethodsWe draw from data spanning 12 years of research (2013-2015), across four studies, including two that are ongoing. These studies have all utilized critical, longitudinal ethnography, where we have followed youth acrosssites (four states), spaces within sites (community-based, home, informal science, school science), and time(focused, youth case studies that are between one year long to 5 years and ongoing). For the two cases presented,we observed Quentin for 6 years in both formal school science and informal science settings, in a Midwesternstate. For Melanie, we observed her for 1.5 years in her formal school science setting in a Northeastern state. Wepurposefully select these two cases to highlight the importance of two different grain-sizes of longitudinalethnography and the focusing on different spaces. These two cases also allow us to unpack the kinds ofpathhacking identity work that can take place across these varying spatial and temporal domains. Data sources(Table 1) include extensive fieldnotes across sites for each case study youth, narrative and artifact interviews withyouth, focus group interviews with youth and their peers, interviews with teachers and adult mentors, and STEMartifacts youth produced.Table 1: Date Types Generation StrategiesData FormParticipantObservationICLS 2016 ProceedingsSpecific Data Generation Strategy• Informal science setting (Green Club): Videorecordings of twice weekly sessions and fieldnotes419Quentin60hrs/yr20hrs/yrMelanien/a130hrs© ISLSInterviewsArtifactThink AloudArtifactCollection• Formal science classroom: Observations andvideo recordings10hrs/yr5 hrs• Focus groups & solo interviews• Allowing youth opportunities to talk about their2hrs/yr2hrsengineering design work in detail (mid and endof year)Youth’s science related work collected: examples include school scienceprojects and classwork; for Quentin, also artifacts from Green club, includingsketch up notebook, 3D Google SketchUp model of design, worksheets,prototype, movie, etc.AnalysisData was analyzed by our research team in the grounded theory tradition, using a constant comparative approach(Straus & Corbin, 1998). We first engaged in open coding by thoroughly perusing all generated data (e.g.transcribed interviews, observation fieldnotes) to surface a) critical episodes of STEM engagement that youthsubsequently leveraged in some way for future STEM engagement; b) how youth positioned themselves duringthese critical episodes; c) how youth responded to how others positioned them within these episodes; and d) theartifacts youth chose as most representative of them in STEM, and why. We took these codes to be signifiers ofthe identity work youth were engaging in. Weekly conversations were held between the authors on these insightsas a way to work towards a more “expansive consensus”; that is to say that any differences in view were debateduntil new meaning was generated as a result of our differences. A detailed list of emergent open codes were keptwith analytic memos attached to them which we brought to bear on the second pass at axial coding.With our theoretical framework as a guide, we then looked for evidence of how youth repeatedperformances of salient identities-in-practice, across space and time. In particular, we looked for what youth did(the actions they took), and how they went about it (the resources they recruited), to create new opportunities andspaces for becoming in STEM that were previously denied. The relationships and connections identified in thissecond stage of coding, in turn, guided our selective coding, and became categories and themes, from which ourexample cases were selected for a final round of analysis and presentationFindingsWe purposefully selected two case study youth, Quentin and Melanie, as focal cases. We highlight these two casesbecause they reflect two highly dynamic cases of identity-in-the making, where youth respond to and push backagainst the people, contexts, sociocultural histories and normative views and expectations, all of which shape theiropportunities to become in STEM. In both cases, the paths authored by youth are non-traditional and non-linear,involving identity work that required creative cross-leveraging and re-mixing of available resources.Their stories help us to see how identity work, in the moment and over time, make authoring paths intoSTEM more or less possible. At the same time, we selected these two cases because they reflect a profounddifference in how identity work in the moment and over time juxtapose in ways that productively yieldpossibilities for the future, both real and imagined. Whereas Quentin eventually both narrates and embodies apossible future in STEM, Melanie struggles to connect who she is and what she brings to the STEM table assomething that holds potential, despite her moments of success. These differences in their stories help us todescribe the complicated process of path authoring through the on-going and high contentious interactions amongself, science and social contexts. Finally, these two cases were selected because they help us to interrogate howthe matrix of race, class and gender intersect and play an active role in the on-going opportunities youth imagineas possible in path authoring. The differences in timescales between the two cases are further leveraged to shedlight on how the simultaneous use of different timescales helps to surface the insight on the role of in-the-momentidentity work on imagining and authoring pathways in STEM.For the purposes of this proposal, we present only Quentin’s case.QuentinQuentin is a gregarious African American young man growing up as an eldest son in a single parent family. Inthe six years we have known Quentin, his family has moved three times in search of more affordable livingconditions. We first met Quentin when he joined the Green Energy Club [GEC] afterschool program in the fifthgrade, at the insistence of the Club’s main director. He told us that he did not mind being in GEC because heICLS 2016 Proceedings420© ISLScould “use the computers to make movies” and “do things” for his community. However, he also indicated thathe was not interested in science.Vignette 1: Quentin’s letter to his 5th grade teacherIn January of his 5th grade year (6 months into the school year), Quentin wrote a letter to his science teacher. Heentitled his letter, “BRINGING FUN SCIENCE TO YOU! (A.K.A) MR.B!”.The text of the letter is as follows:Hi Mr. B, this is your student Quentin the first one in the 2nd row. I’m going to tell you aboutthings that we should to in Science. I’m in [GEC] and [GEC] helps me get my grade for scienceto like a B or a A. I really don’t like getting lectures and getting assignments out of those 20year-old science books, it doesn’t have the latest science news and new experiments.I do things out of school and out of GEC that involve science. I went to door to door andask adults if they use CFL lights. The majority of the adults did NOT use CFL lights, I will tryto decrease the amount of people who use incandescent lights. I did it on Wain Wright Ave. andI did it because people’s bills are up because they use just Incandescent lights. In GEC we madea word that is probably not going to be in the dictionary, but anyways the word is called Fcience,it is Fun and Science put together and I want you to make our science class into a Fcience class.Here’s the definition of Fcience: Doing things that are interesting that include scientific things.Its not so much for energy that I get attention in school, but for being a smart alek. I thinkthat should be good. GO FCIENCE!”Vignette 2: Power-Sucking Pigs, 6th grade & 6th grade scienceIn the summer leading into 6th grade, Quentin participated in a two week GEC summer program focused on solarenergy, which took place at the local university. Quentin investigated solar energy as a viable renewable energysource for the energy challenges his community faces, both economic and environmental. As part of this work,he along with another young man, Cam, produced a 60 second video-based public service announcement – “PowerSucking pigs” – aimed at educating his local community on the importance of these issues (seehttp://getcity.org/blog/2012/10/06/power-sucking-pigs/).In the video, the two boys start out acting out the role of business associates in a meeting using theirlaptop computers. Suddenly, the overhead lights in the room flash and the electrical power goes out. The twobusiness associates look at each other and ask if the laptop lost power. Trying to figure out what caused the powerto go out, they scan the room and discover there are “power sucking pigs” draining all the energy from the walloutlets. The pigs are also played by the two boys who have donned pig noses. The boys infuse their sense ofhumor as we see the business associates chase the pigs set against the sounds of rhythmic drums. The videotransitions to a serious tone as the boys narrate and show graphics of energy use in the US compared to the restof the world. They also add information and images for ideas about how to save energy. The boys included apicture of a home with solar shingles from a field trip taken in the summer program. The video closes with theboys standing in front of a mirror. The boys in unison remove the pig snouts and point to the reflection in themirror and declare, “It’s you!” The video finishes with a link to the group website where viewers can findadditional information.In this PSA, Quentin highlights the need to unplug electrical cords from outlets when they are not in usein order to reduce carbon dioxide emissions and save energy. He provides information about energy consumptionin the US and how using solar panels can reduce electric bills and emissions. All of the information provided inthe PSA came from his scientific investigation (e.g., investigating how much CO2 is emitted from burning fossilfuels, testing how solar panels work, and measuring standby power) and field trip experiences (e.g., visiting asolar powered house and a solar research lab). He also provides information about energy consumption in the USand how using solar panels can reduce electric bills and emissions. He wanted their movie to speak to people likehis mom – making ideas “real” not distant, and making change something that was possible for lower-incomefamilies. Quentin decided to bring his movie later that fall into school to show his science teacher. Of the powersucking pigs movie, he said, “It’s the movie that changed how people thought about me…We showed people howthey can save electricity, which will help with CO2. Mainly, I was excited to show my teacher because he sawthat I could do it. That I got it done. And that I know a lot. I had to get it done. I’m not really that C and D person.”At the time Quentin shared this video, he was struggle in school, in general. We often found him sittingin the hallway, having been sent out of class for “clowning around.” However, Quentin felt that this punishmentwas unfair, as he felt he was not clowning around. He said he was just a funny person. Because he spent so muchtime outside of class, sitting in the hallway for his behavior, he missed many assignments, leading to low grades.ICLS 2016 Proceedings421© ISLSHe did not seek to make up the work because, as he says, “what is the point?” Quentin says his teachers did notknow who he really is or what he is capable of.Vignette 3: Grand Climate Change (7th grade)In the 7th grade, Quentin and his peers were studying how the GEC might “get off the power grid”. Over thecourse of 24 weeks, Quentin engaged in activities investigating the electrical production system and itsalternatives, with a particular focus on energy transformations in these various pathways. About mid-way throughthis unit, Quentin learned about a contest for “youth innovators” hosted by a local non-profit organization focusedon promoting entrepreneurship. Any youth under the age of 18, could submit to the contest a prototype of an ideathat could be brought to market. On his own time Quentin worked on prototyping a game, which he named GrandClimate Change.Quentin’s reason for focusing on a video game was that he wanted to teach young people about theimpact of climate change, which he felt was already “in action.” As he states, “My idea was a Video Game. Askids, we have already seen climate change in action. Hurricane Sandy. Hurricane Katrina. We have seen lots oftornados and big storms all across the country. We have had a warm winter with hardly any snow. This year wasDustbowl 2012.” He was concerned, however, that his peers would not be interested in playing science game,even if was a fun computer-based game. His idea for getting kids interested was to model the game after what heknew to be a very popular game among his peers, Grand Auto Theft. As he states:I wanted to create a video game that teaches other kids about climate change. One game that Ilike and that lots of other kids like is Grand Theft Auto. This game is about taking missionsfrom the masters and completing them. It’s kinda violent. But, it’s fun. It’s popular. I like takingmissions. So, my climate change game would be like this, but it would not be violent. Themissions would be about doing thing to help CO2 from not building up. Each mission, you haveto know more, or learn more about the causes and effects of climate change.Like Grand Auto Theft, the game would involve main character, Tony, whose job it was to solve the missionsand rise through the ranks and take on more difficult and complicated gameplay. Tony would encounterantagonists in his journey, who would attempt to impede his progress. Grand Climate Change not only drawsupon the gameplay of Grand Auto Theft, but also draws heavily upon what he had been learning overtime in hisafter school program, in both in the 6th and 7th grade. As Quentin states,My game . . . would have a main character Tony, who goes around the city and does missions.He helps people do stuff to help prevent climate change. You have to have ideas. You have tounderstand how the things you do contribute to climate change.I started with three missions. Mission #1 is to go to someone’s home and remove allincandescent lightbulbs and replace them with CFLs. So Tony might come to a home of a personwho sells incandescent lightbulbs and they refuse to let him in. So, he has to convince him whyit is important. How it works. You have to think of all the reasons why someone might care.You need to think about the strategy because the more angles you hit, the better you do.Quentin was motivated to make his game because of a contest that he learned about from a peer in the GECprogram. He was excited by the prospect of winning both a camera and a monetary prize ($250) if he placed inthe top three. Winning the contest was also another way that Quentin felt like he would be able to prove to peoplethat he was smart and capable in science. In the end, Quentin won second place in the state-wide contest.Vignette 4: Summer Engineering Program (7th and 8th grades)Quentin applied for and received a full scholarship to a summer engineering program at the state’s technicaluniversity, about 7 hours bus ride from home, and in a part of the state he had never been. He felt that having achance to take engineering classes on a university campus would help him to be better prepared for a future inSTEM. As he stated, “When I finished 7th grade, I decided to apply to Tech University for a summer camp programto learn about engineering. We do not learn about engineering in school, only in GEC. I thought I needed moreof chance to see what it is about. I was accepted to the program with a full scholarship. When I was there tookcivil engineering classes, and we built bridges and things there and learned about it. It was interesting to me.”Quentin enjoyed the program so much that the following summer, after completing the 8th grade, he applied again.The eligibility requirements explicitly state that students could only receive the scholarship one time. However,he requested to be able to apply again because engineering is not taught at his school, and that science was alsoICLS 2016 Proceedings422© ISLSbarely taught at his school. Quentin felt that if he could attend the summer residential program again he would beable to catch up on what other students in other schools probably had the chance to learn. He referenced hisaccomplishments, such as Grand Climate Change and Unacceptable Heat, as indications of his ability to workhard over time, and as indications of his desire to become an engineer. As he stated, “I knew I had to apply againafter 8th grade. No one has ever been able to go twice, but I knew I had no choice but to try. I felt lucky that I gotaccepted.”DiscussionQuentin’s story reminds us how youths’ identities are always in-the-making, responding to and pushing backagainst the people, contexts, sociocultural histories and normative views and expectations which shape their lives.Over time, and across the different spaces of their lives, we have seen these young people grow into particularkinds of STEM people who challenge normative expectations for who can be a STEM person and what it meansto be a STEM person. We have seen them author paths into STEM that are nontraditional, and far from linear.They have strategies in re-mixing and re-purposing both traditional and nontraditional resources – material andsymbolic – alike, in order to engage in the kinds of STEM work they care about, and to be recognized for whothey are and what they can do. Institutions, people, tools, and practices, all imbued with and embedded in histories,have structured the youths’ opportunities to become, and have also provided points of resistance as youth refusemarginalization.Rather than a STEM identity “pathway”, which suggests a pre-laid out route with helpful and visiblesignposts or at least an obvious track for one to walk on, we have come to see minoritized youths’ identity work,over time, as a form of pathhacking. We use the term ‘hacking’ because it refers to the need to wield creativeforce (or agency) to imagine a way forward, most of the time through unclear territory, with unknown outcomesor stopping points along the way. We also use ‘hacking’ to convey the characteristics inherent in authentic, hackersubculture; that of playfulness, excellence, and boundary pushing, all undergirded in egalitarian principles(Himanen, Linus & Castells, 2001). We see minoritized youths’ identity work in STEM reflect these similarcharacteristics, as they seek for more elbow room at the STEM table, and opportunities to transform that table.There is force in our view of hacking because there is resistance. The traditional pathway laid out for minorityyouth is AWAY from STEM (Berry, 2005; Gándara, 2006, Triana & Rodriguez, 1993)For example, if we return to Quentin’s letter that he wrote in the 5th grade, we can see some of thestruggles that he faces as he considers his own pathway into STEM in the 5th grade. He points out which studenthe is –- “This is your student Quentin, the first one in the second row” – suggesting that he worries he does notknow whether his teacher really knows who he is, despite having been in his class for 6 months. He also contrastshis feelings about being a passive recipient of science (“I don't like getting lectures”) with his active engagementin community (“I do things outside of school… I went door to door.”). He points to the creative ways in which heleverage his community funds of knowledge in order to help make science more accessible and salient to hiscommunity. However, he also indicates, in the last paragraph, how important it is for others to recognize andvalue his efforts for what they contribute to community, not for how they reflect negative stereotypical views.As we consider the question of how youth imagine and hack paths into STEM, it appears that a salientfeature of this identity work relates to how these young people try on new ways of being through their variedforms of engagement and actions in response to particular norms or sanctions of the worlds they inhabit. As such,the youth are engaged in an on-going process of negotiating between their individual agency and communityresponse to their efforts, in order to have their identity work legitimized as an important part of becoming inSTEM. However, their hacking is often seen in the contemporary sense of hacking, that of trespassing. Suchjudgment lead youth to see themselves, as Cathy does, as an imposter. We present three ideas derived from ourcase studies that describe the salience of the identity work that youth do across towards their authoring a way intoSTEM: 1) the nature of pathhacking; 2) the tools of pathhacking, and 3) the pitstops, dangerous intersections andcul-de-sacs of pathhacking.Trying on new ways of being with/against norms and expectations: The nature of pathhackingThe youth in our study are engaged in the on-going practice of trying out new ways of being in STEM, both withand against the norms of expectations of the worlds they inhabit. These practices are not always fully intentionaltowards identity building, but they reflect moves to preserve, defend, validate, or call attention to the livedexperiences they bring to learning and becoming in STEM. While such practices, over time, can position youthagainst oppressive norms in a bid to seek new avenues of agency, they also bear potential academic risks.The youth appear to try out these new ways of being not for the sake of resisting sanctioned normsthemselves (e.g. in opposition to the authority figure, often teachers, and sometimes peers, who positioned themon the margins of STEM). Rather, they appear to do so in order to gain recognition for the non-traditional formsICLS 2016 Proceedings423© ISLSof “STEM capital” they possess, in order to transform the discourse, and what counts as legitimate ways of beingand doing in STEM (Archer et al, 2015). In Quentin’s case, he authors the letter to his teacher not in antagonism,but to remind his teacher that he is a hard worker and one who cares about science and his community. Byintroducing the term “Fcience,” he suggests, however, that the world of school science has not yet offered thesame affordances for being in STEM that his community has offered, and suggests changes that could be made tohis classroom. He is aware of the constraints his teacher and school face (e.g., having to use 20 year old textbooks),but suggests that it is still possible to do “fcience.”.Another path hacking maneuver youth perform towards productive STEM identity work is to re-organizeand/or create new figured worlds more suited to who youth are in-the-moment. Quentin drew on compellingreasons (he has no access to engineering in his public school), his deep personal interest in engineering, and hisfuture career aspirations in order to secure for himself another scholarship to the engineering summer camp, evenwhen he was, being a previous awardee, technically ineligible for another application,. Such hacking acts openup new possibilities for thinking about oneself and one’s futures differently (and what one needs to learn and doto get there). Quentin further laminated his STEM identity in the second camp as a result of this hacking move.Critical STEM identity artifacts and allies: The tools of pathhackingSTEM is not an easy world to navigate for the young people with whom we have worked. A fun activity, apersonal connection, or a scientific understanding is often not enough for youth to see themselves a part of thatworld, although these are the solutions often offered in classrooms or reform documents. The youth have had toauthor new routes that demand re-organizing worlds and/or creating new worlds for their identity work to berecognized and valued. Pathway hacking requires both tools (what we call “critical STEM identity artifacts”) andallies (social relationships) for figuring out these unknown worlds one is working within (and its affordances andconstraints) and to work towards reconfiguring these worlds. In particular, we noticed three important roles thathacking tools and allies jointly play.First, both tools and allies help to break down marginalizing binaries, such as that of novice/expert,insider/outsider, successful/unsuccessful. Second, tools and allies legitimized ways of being that are moreinherently germane to youths’ sense of selves instead of the privileged “other”. Third, they broker connectionsacross potentially deep chasms. Quentin’s Grand Climate Change game (tool) reflects his desire to engage othersin broad environmental issues related to everyday practices such as lighting and driving. He is deeply aware ofthe precarious nature of these practices for the people in his community. In authoring the game, he had to drawfrom, and synthesize information from various domains: peer culture, video gaming culture amongst teens, videogaming infrastructure, nuanced content understanding about the different issues salient to Climate Change andtranslating content into a gaming format. Indeed, this suite of expertise that Quentin demonstrated was recognizedwhen he won for the $250 prize. His GC adult mentors (allies) supported his game development. When Quentinreferenced these accomplishments in his application to Tech U’s summer program, he further leveraged thesetools towards new inroads into STEM (brokering connections).The pitstops, dangerous intersections, and cul-de-sacs of pathhackingWe have noted how identity work accrues over time, as small events disrupt oppressive forces in youths’ lives.Each disruption becomes a moment where ideas, tools, and bodies can refigure learning and becoming, givingrise to new relationships and opportunities for becoming in STEM. We view these moments of re-grouping andre-building as pitstops, or rest areas where youth and their allies can begin to imagine for themselves what thepossibilities of becoming in STEM might be. We also view pit stops as safe place to rest or get some help, butalso as a place to regroup and to figure out how to tackle the terrain ahead. For Quentin, pit stops included variousGreen Club experiences and consecutive summer programs at the local technical university.At the same time, such pathhacking is not always forward moving, and young people can find themselvesfacing dangerous intersections, crossings or even deadends. As Quentin entered his teenage years, the structuresof his afterschool club required him to spend his spare time in the teen room, where the rules for engagement weredistinctly different from the younger spaces and the GEC. He eagerly joined the teen room, and relished in hisstatus there. He spent more time hanging out, and less time finishing homework. More energy was put into socialrelationships, time on his phone, and appearance. It was not that any of these practices were in conflict to hisvision of becoming in STEM, but they did not mesh with the club director’s view of what it meant to be a teenleader. His participation in GEC and attendance at Tech U was threatened, and he felt that he was forced betweenworlds he had found ways to marry in the past. That he spent his time in GEC designing a cell phone charger(while being a teen) speaks to one way he sought to push back against dichotomous choices he felt were presentedto him, and at least implicitly, sought to re-organize his worlds so that his new teen status mattered in STEM. ButQuentin was lucky in many ways. He carried with him a history of relationships through GEC (allies) that madeICLS 2016 Proceedings424© ISLSthis identity work as a teen possible in his work on the cell phone charger, and he had a wide repertoire of toolsfor bridging the chasm between these worlds.Conclusions and implicationsIn many ways it is impossible to see how Quentin navigated the pitstops and dangerous intersections withoutcalling into question timescales. We cannot look at any individual act as taking place apart from a history ofengagement across the spaces that make up their lives, what they do in those spaces, and how they sought to moveideas, practices, and tools from one space to another. While achievement scores offer a form of evidence forstudent learning, they reveal only a narrow slice of it --they tell us little about what students understand scienceto be or the mechanisms by which students come to engage in meaningful science learning, and to see themselvesas a part of science. Indeed, who individuals are and want to be in science has serious implications for how orwhy one might engage in science class, enroll in science courses, or use scientific ideas and practices outside ofthe classroom.ReferencesBoal, A. (1974/1979). Teatro del Oprimido. Urizen Books (translation to English 1979 by C. A. McBride & M.O. Leal McBride).Berry, R. Q. (2005). Introduction: Building an infrastructure for equity in mathematics education. The High SchoolJournal, April/May, 1-5Engeström, Y., & Sannino, A. (2010). Studies of expansive learning: Foundations, findings and future challenges.Educational Research Review, 5(1), 1-24Bright, Manchester & Allyndale, 2013Ehret, C., & Hollett, T. (2013). (Re)placing school: middle school students’ countermobilities while composingwith iPods. Journal of adolescent & adult literacy, 57(2).Gutiérrez, K. (2012). Re-Mediating current activity for the future. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 19, 17–21.Gándara, P. (2006). Strengthening the academic pipeline leading to careers in mathematics, science, andtechnology for Latino students. Journal of Hispanic Higher Education, 5(3), 222-237.Holland, D., Lachiotte, D., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (2001). Identity and agency in cultural worlds.Cambridge,MA:Harvard University Press.Margolis, M., Estrella, R., Goode, J., Jellison Holme, J., & Nao, K. (2008). Stuck in the shallow end: Education,race, and computing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.National Academy of Engineering. (2010). Engineering, Social Justice, and Sustainable CommunityDevelopment. Washington DC: National Academies PressOakes, J. (2005). Keeping track: How schools structure inequality. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.Rahm, J. (2012). Collaborative imaginaries and multi-sited ethnography: Space-time dimensions of engagementin an afterschool science program for girls. Ethnography and Education, 7(2), 247-264.Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developinggrounded theory (2nd Ed). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.Triana, E. M., & Rodriguez, M. G. (1993). United-Unidos: Mathematics and science for Hispanics. Washington,DC: American Association for the Advancement of Science.Warren, B., Ogonowski, M., and Pothier, S. (2005). “Everyday” and “scientific”: Rethinking dichotomies inmodes of thinking in science learning. In R. Nemirovsky, A. Rosebery, J. Solomon, and B. Warren(Eds.), Everyday Matters in Mathematics and Science: Studies of Complex Classroom Events (pp. 119148). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Yoder, B. (2014). Engineering by the numbers. American Society for Engineering Education. Available at:http://www.asee.org/papers-and-publications/publications/11-47.pdf. Accessed November 5, 2015.AcknowledgmentsWe thank participating youth, community members and teachers. This work was funded by [blinded].ICLS 2016 Proceedings425© ISLS