Designing Learning Contexts Using Student-Generated IdeasRachel Lam (co-chair), Lung-Hsiang Wong (co-chair), Matthew Gaydos, Jun Song Huang, Lay Hoon Seah,Michael Tanrachel.lam@nie.edu.sg, lunghsiang.wong@nie.edu.sg, matthew.gaydos@nie.edu.sg, david.huang@nie.edu.sg,layhoon.seah@nie.edu.sg, michael.tan@nie.edu.sgNational Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, SingaporeManu Kapur, The Hong Kong Institute of Education, mkapur@ied.edu.hkKaterine Bielaczyc (discussant), Clark University, kbielaczyc@clarku.eduWilliam Sandoval (discussant), University of California Los Angeles, sandoval@gseis.ucla.eduAbstract: This symposium proposes a genre of learning designs called Student-Generated Ideas(SGIs), based on designing learning contexts that promote students as critical producers,distributors, and consumers of knowledge. SGIs place students’ ideas at the center of learningdesigns, considering the learning process as well as the learning goals/outcomes. By solicitingand foregrounding students’ diversified ideas in the classroom and beyond, the learningenvironment communicates to students that their ideas matter to others and that they have aposition of responsibility to their own and their peers’ learning processes. The notion of SGIsis embodied in a repertoire of studies at the Learning Sciences Lab, National Institute ofEducation, Singapore, that offer varied yet overlapping interpretations of how student ideas caninform the design of learning contexts. In sharing the core design principles for SGIsapproaches, this work contributes important components to the learning sciences discipline andchanging educational practice.Keywords: Student-Generated Ideas (SGIs), Productive Failure, preparation for collaboration,language demands of science, learning in makerspaces, game-based learning, seamless learningIntroductionStudent-Generated Ideas (SGIs) embody principles for the design of learning environments that promote studentsas critical producers, distributors, and consumers of knowledge. Rather than focus on mastery of expertknowledge, a major goal of 20th century education, SGIs leverage students’ ideas as the basis for designingeducational settings. Putting students’ ideas at the center of the classroom communicates to students that theirideas matter to others and that they have a position of responsibility to contribute to knowledge advancement inthe classroom community. Highlighting the inquiry process of the student intends to support students to takecontrol of their learning processes. In this way, students not only learn the target subject(s), but also come tounderstand the means for working with and creating knowledge (e.g., finding problems, re-representing or remodeling knowledge, locating resources, testing ideas through experimentation, developing skills inargumentation and the critique of various perspectives, etc.). The burden of SGIs research is to design a smartcontext rather than to assess a student as a “smart” or “not a smart” individual (Barab & Plucker, 2006). Throughsuch designs, student “ability” becomes a function of context, expectations, and tasks. These designs promoteengagement and are founded on learning potential, rather than formally measured achievement.Our proposed symposium on the SGIs approach is built on a strong foundation of studies at the LearningSciences Lab, National Institute of Education, Singapore, that create classroom innovations for 21st centurylearning. These studies have been carried out using a variety of contexts (formal and informal), domains(mathematics, science, language, etc.), tools (computer-mediated communication, mobile technology, gamedesigns, etc.), and schools, and thus, present an opportunity for building invariant meta-design principles acrossthe variant particulars of our projects. The design and enactment of SGIs research necessitates intensivecollaboration with classroom teachers, not always but typically, through design-based research or designexperiments. Such close collaboration helps teachers to rise above being mere experts of content who pass alongtheir expertise to students; they also develop the capabilities to become designers of smart contexts, centeringlearning activities on students’ generated problems, representations, language, learning strategies, and/orsolutions. In addition, close collaboration with teachers through authentic, experiential approaches sustained overa period of time has the added advantage of shifting both the teachers’ and students’ perceptions of learningtowards a student-centric educational culture. Thus, our work aims to enhance both theory and practice.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1090© ISLSThis symposium will be conducted in an interactive format. It will begin with a quick “firehose” sessionwhere a presenter of each set of studies/projects shares her/his work in three minutes. Next will be a combinedposter/roundtable session where presenters engage in discussions with audience members at their respectivestations. Audience members may visit any stations of interest. Moreover, in light of the spirit of SGIs, participantswill be offered the opportunity to note their own questions, interpretations, critiques, or ideas on either the generalnotion of SGIs or on any of the individual studies/projects. During the last segment of the symposium, our twodiscussants will lead a critical discussion of the presentations, interactions, and audience contributions, andsynthesize the salient theoretical and practical crosscutting issues.Preparation for learning from collaboration by generating ideasRachel LamIt is well understood that simply placing a small group of students together in a classroom does not guaranteeeffective collaborative learning (Barron, 2003; Dillenbourg, 2002). To encourage students to capitalize on theaffordances of collaborating to learn, researchers have examined various instructional interventions such as:teaching students collaboration skills so that students collaborate better (Asterhan & Schwarz, 2009; Rummel,Spada, & Hauser, 2009), scaffolding interactional moves via prompts or scripts to facilitate effective collaboration(Fischer, Kollar, Stegmann, & Wecker, 2013; Walker, Rummel, & Koedinger, 2011), or designing tasks to elicitsubstantive discussions during collaboration (Engle & Conant, 2002; Kapur & Bielaczyc, 2012). It is apparentthat students need support to collaborate effectively for learning, but the best ways to do that remains an openquestion.To help students make the most of collaborative learning experiences, we take the approach of designinginstructional tasks in ways that invoke effective collaborative mechanisms without directly imposing on studentbehaviors and interactions. Our task design utilizes a preparation for learning framework, whereby carefullydesigned preparatory activities promote the cognitive and affective readiness to learn from subsequentcollaboration. The tasks are grounded in eliciting students’ naïve representations relative to the content-to-belearned by having students freely generate ideas first individually, and then afterward discuss ideas in a small peergroup. Our experimental studies conducted in situ have shown that compared to learning the canonicalrepresentations explicitly and applying them in a problem task, freely generating ideas leads to significant learninggains after collaborating, particularly on transfer items. In addition, the examination of student artifacts producedthroughout the learning activity has shown that learning can be attributed specifically to collaborating, only inconditions where students freely generated ideas during preparation. Furthermore, by examining students’discussions, we posit that generating ideas before formally learning concepts invokes preparatory mechanisms toa greater extent, which consequently increases the extent to which collaborative mechanisms are invoked.During this symposium, I will share our current work on this learning design, which we call Preparationfor Future Collaboration (PFC). The design draws from the Preparation for Future Learning paradigm (D.Schwartz), Productive Failure (M. Kapur), and the Interactive-Constructive-Active-Passive ICAP framework (M.Chi). We have been partnering with teachers in Singapore to co-design PFC learning tasks for low-achievingstudents from the upper primary to secondary levels in various subject areas (environmental sustainability, urbanplanning, language, mathematics), empirically test our designs in classrooms, and record and analyze studentdiscussions during collaboration. I will offer insights on working with teachers in the Singaporean context, ahighly test-driven educational culture within a strong top-down hierarchical education system. To date, our workhas been received by Singaporean educators as a “truly student-centered” kind of instruction, yet has also beenmet with apprehension as teachers shift from their familiar teacher-centric instructional approaches towardsinstruction based on student-generated ideas.Investigating the learning and transfer effects of student-generated analogiesJun Song Huang and Manu KapurThis presentation expands the Productive Failure learning design (Kapur, 2008; Kapur & Bielaczyc, 2012) byinvestigating the effects of students generating analogies before receiving formal instruction. The design examinesthe learning and transfer mechanisms involved in different pedagogical sequences (i.e., generation first orinstruction first) and in different forms of analogical thinking (i.e., generating analogies or generating analogicalmappings between given analogies).The design seeks to extend the investigation of the learning mechanisms involved in Productive Failurein two aspects. First, the Productive Failure learning design typically requires students to generate problemsolutions during the generation phase. Such activity allows students to recognize their knowledge gaps andICLS 2016 Proceedings1091© ISLSsubsequently attend to those gaps at the instruction phase (Kapur, 2014). By investigating generative activitiesthat do not involve problem solving, this work addresses how to design for Productive Failure without orientingtowards a problem goal state. Second, through problem solving, the Productive Failure learning design activatesand differentiates students’ relevant prior knowledge (Kapur, 2014). The patterns of prior knowledge activationand differentiation have been found to be linked to the effects of learning and transfer (Kapur 2014, 2015). Ourdesign question is whether an activity that is targeted to activate and differentiate relevant prior knowledge byproviding more degrees of freedom might be better for learning and transfer than an activity that has less degreesof freedom (i.e. is more constrained). To explicate, the activity that requires students to generate analogies (whichis more aligned to the conventional Productive Failure generation phase) has more degrees of freedom comparedto the activity that requires generating analogical mappings for given analogies. We speculate that student learningand transfer may be enhanced when they are given more degrees of freedom in generation, especially when theygenerate first before instruction, because this may better activate and differentiate relevant prior knowledge.We conducted an experimental study to investigate the design. One hundred and twenty seventh-gradersin a high-achieving girls’ school in Singapore participated in the study. The curricular unit covered how toformulate a system of linear equations for mathematics word problems. Findings partially confirm our hypothesis,with indicators suggesting that generating analogies before formal instruction enacts different learningmechanisms. In this symposium we share our preliminary data analysis that helps to expand the understandingsof the Productive Failure learning design.Addressing the language demands of science using student-generatedrepresentationsLay Hoon SeahThe fundamental role of language in science has been widely recognized over the past decades, encapsulated innotions such as fundamental literacy (Norris & Phillips, 2003), disciplinary literacy (Moje, 2007) and scienceliteracy for all (Yore, 2012). Underlying these notions is the recognition that scientific language has its ownspecialized features, norms and conventions that distinguish it from language used in other disciplines and ineveryday life (Gee, 2004). Research on students’ use of language (e.g. Frändberg, Lincoln & Wallin, 2013;Schoultz, Säljö, & Wyndhamn, 2001; Seah, Clarke & Hart, 2015) has also highlighted students’ difficulties ininterpreting and employing the language of science. A critical aspect of science teaching thus involves attendingto and addressing the demands inherent in the use of the language of science. However, while science teachersmay recognize the language demands of science, they face challenges in designing lessons that foreground andaddress the language demands of science in an explicit way (Seah, 2015).In this study, the researchers worked collaboratively with science teachers to design lessons that tookinto consideration the language (in addition to the conceptual) demands of science. As with the other studies inthis symposium, SGIs was an important component of the lesson design, and in particular, its manifestation in theform of linguistic representations. These student-generated representations played a key role in the lessons inseveral ways. Firstly, they provided one of the means by which to determine the nature of the language demandsand the extent to which these demands needed to be addressed in the lessons. This was achieved by examiningthe similarities and differences between the student-generated representations and the scientific language duringthe process of lesson planning and review. During the lessons, these representations became the target ofintervention as well as a resource for teaching. For example, teachers highlighted the linguistic differencesbetween the student-generated representations and the canonical use of scientific language to bring aboutawareness of the language demands of science.Drawing on a variety of data such as teacher interviews, lesson videos and videos of the lesson planningsessions with teachers, I analyzed the process in which the student-generated representations were utilized acrossdifferent contexts (before, during and after lessons). The analysis revealed the connections (or lack thereof) thatthe teachers made among the various roles of these representations, and through this I offer insights into thechallenges teachers encountered and share some possible ways for supporting teachers to use student-generatedrepresentations effectively.Makerspaces as sites for studying embodied creativity practicesMichael TanWhile research in cognition has moved into the realm of the sociocultural with the landmark work of distributedcognition researchers, in recent years some attention has returned to the individual as the unit of analysis.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1092© ISLSSpecifically, the embodied cognition research agenda has started to look at the role of bodily actions andinteractions with objects (and to a lesser extent, other humans) in cognitive processing tasks. Essentially,embodied cognition now supposes that actions need to be considered as cognitive if they perform the role of anequivalent process “in the brain.” Thought about this way, embodied cognition is a means of spreading theexplanatory load for cognitive processes out of the skull, and to the body and beyond (Clark, 2001; Clark &Chalmers, 1998; Shapiro, 2011). This project is a means to explore the role of the body and its material interactionswith reality when students learn through the generation of draft designs.Using this embodied cognition perspective then, an interesting context to study is the phenomena oftinkering; loosely called “thinking with your hands” by design leaders, and widely acknowledged in makerspacesto herald a new way of learning STEM knowledge, skills, and dispositions. Yet, the question remains how toexplain tinkering. Specifically, thinking about the phases of design problem solving, two major cognitiveprocesses are ill-structured problem solving, and well-structured problem solving. Taking the geneplore (Finke,Ward, and Smith, 1992) model of creativity, the hypothesis remains that there ought to be two rather distinct rolesthat actions play in the design and making of artifacts (see, also, Goel, 2014). Given the widely advertised abilityof makerspaces to facilitate innovativeness and creativity, I present my preliminary work studying the processesof tinkering in makerspaces.Students in this study were presented a design prompt to create a device to attract teachers’ attention, acollection of magnetically connectable electronics components, and some tools for cutting and joining materials.Six pairs of student volunteers were video-recorded in pull-out sessions of about an hour each, and the actionsand talk during their design sessions were examined. Initial analysis indicates: (i) that students do not distinguishbetween distinct divergent generation and convergent problem solving phases, with more creative designersremaining open to suggestions for improvement throughout the entire design phase; (ii) student actionsnonetheless demonstrate two distinct classes, with a higher degree of epistemic action associated with anexploratory phase of their activity even when they did not identify it as such. Implications for further research andpractice will be discussed.Designing for game designMatthew GaydosGame design has been successfully used to introduce students to academic content and skills like programming(Kafai, 2006; Overmars, 2004) as well as so-called twenty first century curricula like digital literacy or designthinking (Games, 2008; Gaskin & Berente, 2011). However, aside from using it as a motivating activity (e.g. Ciraet al., 2015), there are not well-tested approaches or frameworks for integrating game design into curricula (forgames generally, see Foster & Shah, 2012). This is especially the case when using game design to teach contentthat is secondary to game production (e.g. biology as opposed to programming).In this presentation, I describe a design-based research project in which an extensible geography cardgame is developed for use in Singapore classrooms. The card game is designed to provide students with a gamebased model to think with as they engage the target content. Once students understand the game model, they maythen be able to use it both for understanding other models and predicting outcomes of model perturbation,especially through their own designs (e.g. inventing new rules and cards).Though these student-generated designs are theoretically useful, they may be impractical withinSingapore classrooms, which tend to be oriented toward improving high-stakes assessment results (Chee,Mehrotra, & Ong, 2014; Hogan et al., 2013). Additionally, educational games bring with them a host of logisticalchallenges (Van Eck, 2006), and may be difficult to use with audiences unaccustomed to game-based approaches(Chee, Mehrotra, & Ong, 2014). The study that will be presented details the contextual factors that support anddetract from student-generated game play and design as a pedagogical tool within a high-stakes test-centeredsystem. Through interviews with teachers and students, it focuses on the perceived affordances and challenges ofintegrating games and game design into the curriculum.Singapore’s Ministry of Education has provided widespread support of game-based learning and otherstudent-centered, technology-based pedagogical developments. Because of the centralized organization ofSingapore’s education system, there exist few mechanisms for feedback regarding how such policies influencepractice or how successful enactments may be spread across sites. Teacher and student feedback is thus not onlyuseful for understanding how these new pedagogical artifacts (including games) may be better developed andused, but provides a means for reflecting on the relationship between policy goals and classroom outcomes.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1093© ISLSSeamless learning: Idea generation from and for cross-contextual learningprocessesLung-Hsiang WongSeamless learning is when a person experiences a continuity of learning, and consciously bridges the multifacetedlearning efforts, across a combination of locations, times, technologies or social settings (Sharples et al., 2012;Wong, 2015). Despite often being characterized as “anytime, anywhere learning,” the notion of seamless learningis however differing from e-learning. “Anytime, anywhere learning” could also refer to flow learning(Csikszentmihalyi, 1990; Sharples, 2015), i.e., to induce a flow state such that learners are so engaged in a learningactivity that they lose awareness of their surroundings. Instead, seamless learning foregrounds the uniqueecological constructs/resources in various learning spaces including artifacts, tools and people which/who couldfacilitate multifaceted tasks (Wong, 2015), e.g., the classroom for learning engagement and consolidations,physical spaces for situated and authentic learning, online platforms for information seeking/sharing and peerdiscussions, etc.Thus, a holistic seamless learning experience requires learners not only to interact with other people (e.g.,peer learners) and instructor-provided artifacts within a relatively closed learning environment (e.g., traditionalclassroom or e-learning portals), but also with the authentic environment and perhaps the Internet at large, wherethey may draw elements or information that they incidentally encounter or recall (e.g., building on priorknowledge or past experiences), exploit hidden affordances of in situ artifacts, and appropriate the rightcombination of these elements to “jointly mediate” (Wong, Chen & Jan, 2012) their in situ and/or cross-contextuallearning tasks. Under such a perspective, learners may generate various forms of “ideas” throughout the learningprocess, encompassing not only the intermediate or final learner-created artifacts as representations of their currentknowledge states, but also the process-related strategies that the learners figure out by themselves to improve theirlearning process or overcome novel learning problems. In light of this perspective, our team developed analternative qualitative method known as “artifact-oriented analysis” (Wong, Chen & Jan, 2012), rooted in theVygotskian notion of “mediation by artifacts” and distributed cognition to unpack the seamless learning processdata collected through our studies (e.g., So, Seow & Looi, 2009; Wong, 2013). In a nutshell, as aspirations forlifelong learning, the advocates for seamless learning should entail the fostering of learners’ dispositions and skillsin self-generating “ideas” to advance their own learning endeavors.Another important concept of seamless learning that is relevant to SGIs is “recontextualization.” Earlierliterature tended to dichotomize decontextualization and contextualization in expounding the differences betweenformal and informal learning (e.g., Hung, Lee & Lim., 2012; Lave & Wenger, 1991), perhaps due to privilegingauthenticity. We offer an alternative perspective of “recontextualization” (cf. Looi, et al., 2010) of skills,knowledge or meaning through the cross-contextual and cross-temporal learning trajectories. For example, an“idea” incubated in class may be practiced or reified in authentic settings, and later be scrutinized, enriched,transformed and/or challenged within the social learning spaces, with relevant but diversified personalperspectives, knowledge and experiences mediating the socio-constructivist discourse (e.g., Lewis, Pea, & Rosen,2010; So, Seow, & Looi, 2009). Through such a cross-contextual trajectory, both the “idea” and the learningprocess itself are constantly “recontextualized,” which would lead to deep learning.DiscussionWhile the above research projects vary in orientations and research goals, the commonality that stands out amongthem is the focus on student-generated ideas as a cornerstone of the learning design. Students’ ideas play multipleroles in the respective projects (e.g. as a targeted outcome in the development of learning tasks, target forintervention, resource for learning, data source, etc.). These roles can be organized according the cognitive, socialand cultural aspects in the design of interventions (Kapur & Bielaczyc, 2012). By leveraging various types ofstudents’ ideas in several ways (e.g. as knowledge representations, language, strategies, decisions, designthinking), we offer our collective design principles embedded in the SGIs approach in Figure 1.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1094© ISLSDesign Principles for Student-Generated IdeasCognitivePlanning for andleveragingunpredictability...Eliciting students’ naïve representations of yet-to-be learned concepts allows teachers tobetter understand what students know and can guide their instructional moves accordingly.In order to do that, teachers must become comfortable with planning for the “unplannable,”since they cannot know exactly what a student knows until the student shares it....by turningstudent errorsintoopportunities.Teachers can oftentimes be quick to correct student errors for a number of reasons: fearsthat students’ errors will “stick,” discomfort with uncertainty, aversion to failure, andgeneral habit/familiarity with being the “sage on the stage.” However, allowing students tocorrect their own errors, struggle through failures, and manage uncertainty are powerfullearning resources. SGIs provide opportunistic conditions that support students to do thehard work of struggling to overcome their own misunderstandings and to develop theirnaive representations.SocialCapitalizing onstudent dialogue.The social opportunities in a learning environment are crucial for designs based on studentgenerated ideas. Conditions should be set up such that students can engage in natural andauthentic conversation. It is not about imposing structures onto social experiences thatdirect students to discuss “the right things,” but creating an atmosphere through thelearning design that promotes the curiosity and motivation to talk through ideas, thoughts,and decisions with one another.CulturalPerceiving ideasas a “means”and not an“end.”Although helping students to generate their own ideas in the first place is a noteworthygoal, the intent of SGIs is rather to use students’ ideas as the means for (a) the student toimprove understanding and meaning-making and (b) the teacher to facilitate the studentlearning process by basing instruction on the students’ own representations. Students andteachers may not be initially comfortable with this perception and process, and so aclassroom culture that supports SGIs may need to be developed.Figure 1: Design principles for Student-Generated Ideas.With student ideas at the forefront, our collective work addresses how approaches based on SGIsinfluence the learning mechanisms, knowledge outcomes, and socio-cultural surround in authentic settings. SGIsinvolve a process of ideating, e.g., through the generation of solutions/problems, elicitation of language, invoking“design thinking” through play and embodied experiences, and removing the “seams” of learning from theclassroom to the informal environment. This symposium not only aims to fill gaps in the knowledge base, butalso plays an active role in progressing the cultural shift towards student-centric instruction. Through distillingand sharing the core design principles around SGIs-focused learning approaches, this work contributes toimportant components to the learning sciences discipline and in changing educational practice.ReferencesAsterhan, C.S.C. & Schwarz, B.B. (2009). Argumentation and explanation in conceptual change: Indications fromprotocol analyses of peer-to-peer dialog. Cognitive Science, 33, 374-400.Barab, S.A. & Plucker, J.A. (2006). Smart people or smart contexts? Cognition, ability, and talent developmentin an age of situated approaches to knowing and learning. Educational Psychologist, 37(3), 165-182.Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307- 359.Chee, Y. S., Mehrotra, S., & Ong, J. C. (2014). Authentic game-based learning and teachers’ dilemmas inreconstructing professional practice. Learning, Media and Technology, 40(4), 514-535.http://doi.org/10.1080/17439884.2014.953958ICLS 2016 Proceedings1095© ISLSCira, N. J., Chung, A. M., Denisin, A. K., Rensi, S., Sanchez, G. N., Quake, S. R., & Riedel-Kruse, I. H. (2015).A Biotic Game Design Project for Integrated Life Science and Engineering Education. PLoS Biol, 13(3),e1002110. http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1002110Clark, A. (2001). Mindware: an introduction to the philosophy of cognitive science. Oxford, UK: OxfordUniversity Press.Clark, A., & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind. Analysis, 58, 10-23.Csikszentmihályi, M. (1990). Literacy and intrinsic motivation. Daedalus, 119(2), 115-140.Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructionaldesign. In P. Kirschner (Ed.) Three World of CSCL. Can We Support CSCL?, pp. 61-91. OpenUniversiteit Nederland, Heerlen.Engle, R.A. & Conant, F.R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement:Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction,20(4), 399-483.Finke, R. A., Ward, T. B., & Smith, S. M. (1992). Creative Cognition: Theory, Research, and Applications,Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Stegmann, K., & Wecker, C. (2013). Toward a script theory of guidance in computersupported collaborative learning. Educational Psychologist, 48(1), 55-66.Foster, A., & Shah, M. (2012). PCaRD: A model for teachers to integrate games in their classrooms. In Societyfor Information Technology & Teacher Education International Conference (Vol. 2012, pp. 2525–2533).Frändberg, B., Lincoln, P., & Wallin, A. (2013). Linguistic resources used in Grade 8 students’ submicro levelexplanations—Science items from TIMSS 2007. Research in Science Education, 43(6), 2387-2406. doi:10.1007/s11165-013-9363-0Games, A. (2008). Three dialogs: a framework for the analysis and assessment of twenty-first-century literacypractices, and its use in the context of game design within Gamestar Mechanic. E-Learning and DigitalMedia, 5(4), 396 – 417.Gaskin, J., & Berente, N. (2011). Video Game Design in the MBA Curriculum: An Experiential LearningApproach for Teaching Design Thinking. Communications of the Association for Information Systems,29(1). Retrieved from http://aisel.aisnet.org/cais/vol29/iss1/6Gee, J. P. (2004). Language in the science classroom: Academic social languages as the heart of school-basedliteracy. In W. Saul (Ed.), Crossing Borders in Literacy and Science Instruction: Perspectives on Theoryand Practice (pp. 13-32). Newark, DE: International Reading Association & National Science TeachersAssociation.Goel, V. (2014) Creative brains: designing in the real world. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 8:241. doi:0.3389/fnhum.2014.00241Hogan, D., Chan, M., Rahim, R., Kwek, D., Maung Aye, K., Loo, S. C., … Luo, W. (2013). Assessment and thelogic of instructional practice in Secondary 3 English and mathematics classrooms in Singapore. Reviewof Education, 1(1), 57–106. http://doi.org/10.1002/rev3.3002Hung, D., Lee, S.-S., & Lim, K. Y. T. (2012). Authenticity in learning for the twenty-first century: Bridging theformal and the informal. Educational Technology Research and Development, 60(6), 1071-1091.Kafai, Y. (2006). Playing and Making Games for Learning: Instructionist and Constructionist Perspectives forGame Studies. Games and Culture, 1(1), 36.Kapur, M. (2015). The preparatory effects of problem solving versus problem posing on learning from instruction.Learning and instruction, 39, 23-31.Kapur, M. (2008). Productive failure. Cognition and Instruction, 26(3), 379-424.Kapur, M. (2014). Productive Failure in learning math. Cognitive Science, 38, 1008-1022.Kapur, M., & Bielaczyc, K. (2012). Designing for productive failure. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(1), 4583.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.Lewis, S., Pea, R., & Rosen, J. (2010). Beyond participation to co-creation of meaning: mobile social media ingenerative learning communities. Social Science Information, 49(3), 1-19.Looi, C.-K., Seow, P., Zhang, B. H., So, H.-J., Chen, W., & Wong, L.-H. (2010). Leveraging mobile technologyfor sustainable seamless learning: A research agenda. British Journal of Educational Technology, 42(1),154-169.Moje, E. B. (2007). Developing socially just subject-matter instruction: A review of the literature on disciplinaryliteracy teaching. Review of Research in Education, 31, 1-44.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1096© ISLSNorris, S. P., & Phillips, L. M. (2003). How literacy in its fundamental sense is central to scientific literacy.Science Education, 87(2), 224-240.Overmars, M. (2004). Teaching Computer Science Through Game Design. Computer, 37(4), 81–83.http://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2004.1297314Rummel, N., Spada, H., & Hauser, S. (2009). Learning to collaborate while being scripted or by observing amodel. Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 69-92.Schoultz, J., Säljö, R., & Wyndhamn, J. (2001). Conceptual knowledge in talk and text: What does it take tounderstand a science question? Instructional Science, 29, 213-236.Seah, L. (2015). Elementary Teachers’ Perception of Language Issues in Science Classrooms. InternationalJournal of Science and Mathematics Education, 1-20. doi: 10.1007/s10763-015-9648-zSeah, L. H, Clarke D. & Hart C. (2015) Understanding Middle School Students’ Difficulties in Explaining DensityDifferences from a Language Perspective, International Journal of Science Education, 37:14, 23862409, DOI:10.1080/09500693.2015.1080879Shapiro, L. (2011). Embodied cognition: New problems in philosophy. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.Sharples, M. (2015). Seamless learning despite context. In L.-H. Wong, M. Milrad, & M. Specht (Eds.), SeamlessLearning in the Age of Mobile Connectivity (pp. 41-56): Springer.Sharples, M., McAndrew, P., Weller, M., Ferguson, R., FitzGerald, E., Hirst, T., . . . Whitelock, D. (2012).Innovating Pedagogy 2012. Retrieved from Milton Keynes, UK:So, H.-J., Seow, P., & Looi, C.-K. (2009). Location matters: Leveraging knowledge building with mobile devicesand Web 2.0 technology. Interactive Learning Environments, 17(4), 367-382.Van Eck, R. (2006). Digital Game-Based Learning: It’s not just the digital natives who are restless. EducauseReview, 41(2), 16–30.Walker, E., Rummel, N., & Koedinger, K.R., (2011). Designing automated adaptive support to improve studenthelping behaviors in a peer tutoring activity. Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6, 279-306.Wong, L.-H. (2013). Analysis of students' after-school mobile-assisted artifact creation processes in a seamlesslanguage learning environment. Educational Technology & Society, 16(2), 198-211.Wong, L.-H. (2015). A brief history of mobile seamless learning. In L.-H. Wong, M. Milrad, & M. Specht (Eds.),Seamless Learning in the Age of Mobile Connectivity (pp. 3-40): Springer.Wong, L.-H., Chen, W., & Jan, M. (2012). How artefacts mediate small group co-creation activities in a mobileassisted language learning environment? Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 28(5), 411-424.Yore, L. D. (2012). Science literacy for all: More than a slogan, logo, or rally flag! In K. C. D. Tan & M. Kim(Eds.), Issues and challenges in science education research: Moving forward (pp. 5-23). Dordrecht:Springer.AcknowledgmentsWe thank all participating teachers and students. This work was partially funded by the National Institute ofEducation and Ministry of Education in Singapore through the following grants:OER 16/14 SLH; OER 06/15 RJL; OER 12/14 MT; OER 02/15 HJS; OER 14/14 WLH; OER 04/15 MGICLS 2016 Proceedings1097© ISLS