Investigating Effects of Embedding Collaboration in an IntelligentTutoring System for Elementary School StudentsJennifer K. Olsen, Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, jkolsen@cs.cmu.eduNikol Rummel, Institute of Educational Research, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, nikol.rummel@rub.deVincent Aleven, Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, aleven@cs.cmu.eduAbstract: Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITSs) are beneficial for individual students learning inseveral domains, including mathematics where they have been used to support both secondaryand elementary students. Collaborative learning may be beneficial to include in ITSs,particularly for conceptual knowledge. There is little work on collaborative ITSs, and it hasmostly focused on older students. We aim to extend this work to elementary school students, byextending an ITS for fractions so it supports collaborative learning. We also build upon ourprevious work to further investigate the complementary strengths of collaborative andindividual learning. In our study, 189 elementary school students worked with a conceptual ora procedural fractions ITS, and either individually or collaboratively. Students in both ITSconditions learned, but there were no differences in learning between individual andcollaboration. However, the students working collaboratively spent less time on the tutor,indicating potential benefits of collaborative learning on efficiency in this setting.Keywords: collaborative learning, intelligent tutoring systems, primary schoolIntroductionIntelligent Tutoring Systems (ITSs) have been very successful in supporting students’ learning as they workindividually to solve problems (VanLehn, 2011). Although this individual work has been shown to be beneficial,there may be additional benefits from students being able to work collaboratively, especially when they areacquiring conceptual knowledge (Mullins, Rummel, & Spada, 2011). Previous research has shown that integratingcollaboration into an ITS environment can be conducive for learning (Walker, Rummel, & Koedinger, 2009). Butmost of this work has been done with older students and has not been extended to elementary school studentswhere collaboration is expected to be more challenging. We aim to investigate if the benefits seen with olderstudents can apply to elementary school students and how best to utilize collaboration and individual learningwithin an ITS to support students.Although ITSs have been shown to be beneficial to students in many domains (Murray, 2003), they havebeen shown to be particularly successful with mathematics (Ritter, Anderson, Koedinger, & Corbett, 2007). Forelementary school students, fractions are challenging (Moss, 2005), but the learning of fractions can besuccessfully supported through the use of an ITS, showing that ITSs can be beneficial for young learners (Rau,Aleven, & Rummel, 2012). ITSs are beneficial to students by providing them with cognitive support as they solvea problem (VanLehn, 2011). ITSs provide step-by-step guidance for students both through the use of immediatefeedback on steps and through on demand hints. That is, students will know right away when an error occurs andthey can decide to request help from the system to figure out how to do any problem-solving step correctly. ITSsalso track individual students’ knowledge growth, which enables them to implement a cognitive mastery approachwith individualized problem selection. ITSs often focus on helping students acquire problem-solving skills, andby integrating collaboration, we may be able to support students in explaining their reasoning, as is specified inthe United States common core standards (Common Core State Standard Initiatives, 2015).Collaboration is often beneficial for learning (Slavin, 1989; Lou, Abrami, & d’Apollonia, 2001) and is away to get students to express their reasoning (Hausmann, Chi, & Roy, 2004). Collaborative problem solving mayhelp students develop a deeper conceptual understanding (Teasley, 1995) through mechanisms such as coconstruction and explanation-giving (Hausmann, Chi, & Roy, 2004; Chi & Wylie, 2014). Through thesemechanisms, collaborative learning may be beneficial as an addition to standard ITS technology, especially forconceptual knowledge where students often need to develop a deeper understanding of concepts in the domain(Mullins et al., 2011).Although most prior research on ITSs has focused on students working individually, there has been somework combining ITSs and collaboration with high school students (Baghaei, Mitrovic, & Irwin, 2007; Walker etal., 2009; Diziol, Walker, Rummel, & Koedinger, 2010). Walker, Rummel, and Koedinger (2009) found thatstudents working with a tutor that had been redesigned to support peer tutoring (i.e., the tutoring system providedICLS 2016 Proceedings338© ISLSsupport to the student in the role of the peer tutor) achieved learning gains at least equivalent to those workingindividually, demonstrating that collaboration can be successfully combined with ITSs. However, much of thiswork has been done with secondary and college students rather than elementary school students. For elementaryschool students, learning collaboratively may be challenging, especially in STEM domains such as mathematics(Mercer & Sams, 2006). Elementary school students often do not have fully developed social skills, makingcollaborative activities more challenging. Also, elementary school students may not have developed thevocabulary to discuss complex math concepts and relations. Despite these challenges, collaboration may still beeffective for elementary school students by allowing them to make their thinking explicit and to practice theirability to talk about mathematics (Chi & Wylie, 2014). Even outside of ITSs, few studies have investigatedwhether computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL) can have a positive impact on learning withelementary school students. The studies that have been conducted in this area have either compared the use of aCSCL setting to face-to-face collaborative learning (i.e., not supported by computers) or have focused ontechnology interventions that mix individual and collaborative learning tasks without comparing learningcollaboratively to learning individually as we propose to do (Chen & Looi, 2013; Lazakidou & Retalis, 2010;Tsuei, 2011). This research has shown positive impacts of young children working in small groups and withcomputers that can be extended to the use of ITSs.In addition, collaborative and individual learning may have different strengths. For example, individualand collaborative learning activities may be better for acquiring different types of knowledge, such as conceptualand procedural knowledge (Mullins et al., 2011). Conceptual knowledge is the implicit and explicit understandingof the principles in a domain and how they are interrelated (Rittle-Johnson, Siegler, & Alibali, 2001) and may bebetter acquired through collaboration (Teasley, 1995). Procedural knowledge is the ability to be able to performthe steps and actions in sequence to solve a problem (Rittle-Johnson, Siegler, & Alibali, 2001) and may be betteracquired through individual work with the opportunity of more practice. Understanding the relative strengths ofindividual and collaborative learning, which we focus on in this paper, may ultimately help in designinginstructional conditions that effectively combine individual and collaborative learning.In a previous study with elementary school students (Olsen, Belenky, Aleven, & Rummel, 2014a), wedid not find differences in learning gains between students working collaboratively or individually for eitherconceptual or procedural knowledge. However there were several weaknesses in the study that we are addressingwith the current study. In the previous study, the procedural tasks may have been too difficult for the students.Also, the total instruction time was only 45 minutes, which may not have been enough for differences in learninggains to emerge. The current study took place in a more realistic classroom setting (the previous study was a pullout study), allowing the students to speak more freely and to work with the tutor across multiple sessions. Thestudy involved 189 students and ran over five class periods to provide time for multiple units to be completed. Totest our hypotheses that a collaborative ITS can effectively support young learners, and that collaborative andindividual learning have different strengths for conceptual and procedural knowledge, we used two separate 2condition between-subjects designs. Each compared a collaborative and an individual learning conditions, onewith a conceptually-oriented set of tutor problems, and one with a procedurally-oriented set of tutor problems.This design allows us to compare between individual and collaborative learning within both conceptually-orientedand procedurally-oriented tutors. The design is not a true 2x2 design. The conceptual and procedural tutors cannotbe directly compared because they support different learning goals.MethodsBefore we present the study in more detail, we describe our ITS designed to support fractions learning.Tutor designInformed by prior work on the Fractions Tutor (Rau et al., 2012) and our previous collaborative tutors forequivalent fractions (Olsen et al., 2014a), we developed a new ITS for a range of fractions units. To comparestudents working collaboratively to students working individually, we built two parallel versions of the tutors foruse in our study, one for collaborative learning and one for individual learning. The ITS versions were built withthe Cognitive Tutoring Authoring Tools (CTAT), extended to support collaborative tutors (Olsen et al., 2014b).For both collaborative and individual learning, we created two sets of tutor units, focused on either proceduralknowledge or conceptual knowledge. For both sets, the units covered were naming, making, equivalent, leastcommon denominator, comparing, adding, and subtracting fractions. For each unit, there were eight problems. Allof the problems within a unit were of the same type and focused on the same procedure or concept. The problemswere divided between graphical representations with two problems focusing on circles, two problems focusing onrectangles, and four problems focusing on number lines. Although the conceptually-oriented and procedurallyoriented tutors covered the same units, the materials were fundamentallyICLS 2016 Proceedings339© ISLSFigure 1. An example of an individual procedural problem for comparing fractions. The students go through thesteps of converting fractions as a general mathematical procedure for solving this type of problem.different to match different learning goals. For the procedural problem set, the students went through the stepsneeded to solve the problem. For example, for the comparing fractions unit, students would first find the leastcommon denominator for the fractions they were trying to compare (see Figure 1) and then convert all of thefractions using this common denominator. Once they had completed this process, they were asked to put thefractions in order, from smallest to largest. For the conceptual problem set, the students were asked to fill inanswers to see a pattern in the fractions, and then to fill in the blank for sentences to generalize the patterns tofractions concepts. For example, for the comparing fractions unit, the students were asked to mark if fractionswere larger or smaller than one another. These fractions consisted of one where the denominators were the same,one where the numerators are the same, and one that is mixed (see Figure 2). The students were then guided tounderstand that when numerators are the same, then the fraction with the smaller denominator is larger, and whenthe denominators are the same then the fraction with the larger numerator is larger. These fill in the blanks werereworded for every other problem so students could not just memorize the slot that each answer should go into.Figure 2. An example of a collaborative conceptual problem for comparing fractions. In panel A, each student isresponsible for half the answers while in panel B the students share the responsibility for the questions.In addition to the cognitive support normally provided by an ITS (step-level guidance for problemsolving) that is used in both the individual and collaborative tutors, the collaborative tutors are also supported withembedded collaborative scripts for each tutor problem to provide social support for students (Kollar, Fischer, &Hesse, 2006). The collaborative tutors support synchronous, networked collaboration, in which collaboratingstudents sit at their own computer and have a shared (though differentiated) view of the problem state and differentactions/resources available to them. The students sat next to each other and communicated through speech. Theembedded scripts supported collaboration through a distribution of responsibility to create accountability andinterdependence (Slavin, 1989). The students were responsible for different parts of the problem (see Figure 2).ICLS 2016 Proceedings340© ISLSOften in the problem, each student had some action that only they could take for the step to be completed. Thissupported both students in needing to contribute. In Figure 2, each student has a set of the compared fractions.The students cannot fill in all three of the answers by themselves because they do not have access to all of thecorrect answers. They need to work together with their partner to fill in all of the blanks and submit the problem.This distributes the responsibility for each of the steps across both students. In addition, some steps createdinterdependence between the students. An example is for equivalent fractions that if one student entered anumerator, this would influence what the correct denominator would be for their partner. The embedded scriptsprovided support for the collaboration to be directly integrated into the ITS. Besides the embedded collaborationscript, all collaborative and individual tutors were designed to be identical to allow for a comparison. During thetime with the ITS, students who were collaborating sat next to each other but worked on different computers. Theycommunicated through speech, which was recorded.Experimental design and procedureWe conducted a study with 189 4th and 5th grade students from two schools across two school districts. Thestudents came from a total of nine classrooms and five teachers. The experiment took place during the students’regular class periods. All students worked with the fractions ITS described above, either on conceptually-orientedtasks only or on procedurally-oriented tasks only, and working either collaboratively all the way through orindividually all the way through. Thus, we had 4 conditions, which, as discussed above, we analyze as two separate2-conditions designs. Students were assigned to individual and collaborative conditions based on class for a quasiexperimental design. This random assignment based on class was done to limit the disruption to the class. Therewere five classes that were assigned to work collaboratively and four classes that were assigned to workindividually. Within each class, teachers paired their students based on students who would work well togetherand had similar math abilities. These pairs were then randomly assigned to work on the procedurally-oriented orthe conceptually-oriented problem sets. Within the class there was an even split between students working onconceptually-oriented problems and students working on procedurally-oriented problems.During the study, if a student’s partner was absent in the collaborative conditions, the student would bepaired with another student working on their same type of problem set for the remainder of the experiment. Ifthere were two students that needed partners who had worked together before, they were paired together. If therewere an odd number of students who needed a partner, then one student would work individually for the day. Theteacher informed student pairings with a new partner when there was more than one option. When students startedwith a different partner from the day before, they would begin on the problem set at the place of the student thatwas less far in the problem sets.The study ran across five days for each class where each day the students had 45 minutes to work withthe tutor. On the first day, the students took the pretest individually. When they completed the pretest, they movedonto a tutorial that gave some instruction on how to interact with the tutor; otherwise, this was done on the secondday. The students then worked with the tutor for the next three days in their condition. On the fifth day, the studentstook a posttest individually.Test itemsWe assessed students’ knowledge at two different times using two equivalent test forms in counterbalancedfashion. The tests targeted both conceptual and procedural knowledge types for all conditions. Each test had 20questions, 10 procedural and 10 conceptual where six were isomorphic with the main six fractions units and fourwere near transfer targeting the four upper level fractions units. For each question on the test, the students wereable to get a point for each step completed correctly. On the tests there were 23 possible conceptual test pointsand 68 procedural test points. Because of the discrepancy in points for the different types of knowledge, for bothconceptual and procedural test scores, the percentages were used for all analyses.ResultsDue to absenteeism during the study, only 146 of the 189 students were used for the analysis. Students wereexcluded if they missed either the pretest or posttest. They were also excluded if they missed more than 1 day ofworking with the tutor. In the collaborative condition, students were excluded if they had more than a total of twopartners during the tutors. There was no significant difference between conditions with respect to the number ofstudents excluded, F(3, 185) = 0.72, p = .54. There was also no significant difference between conditions on thepretest score for either the conceptual test items, F(3, 142) = 0.49, p = .69, or for the procedural test items, F(3,142) = 0.68, p = .57.As discussed, we used a separate 2-condition between-subjects design to compare an individual and acollaborative learning condition for conceptually-oriented and procedurally-oriented tutor problem sets. For theICLS 2016 Proceedings341© ISLSanalysis, the data was thus treated as two separate data sets within which students working collaboratively orindividually could be compared. Out of the 146 students used in the analysis, 70 students worked with theprocedurally-oriented ITS, and 76 students worked with the conceptually-oriented ITS.Pre/posttest learning gainsTo investigate whether students learned using our tutors, and if there was a difference in learning between thestudents working collaboratively and students working individually within the two tutor problem sets, we used amultilevel approach to take into account the repeated measures of the pretest and posttest and differences betweenteachers. Within this analysis, we treated all students as individuals. We conducted a hierarchical linear model(HLM) with student at the first level and teacher at the second level. At level 1, we modeled the pretest and posttestscores, and at level 2, we accounted for random differences that could be attributed to the teacher. We did notinclude dyads as a level because of the added complexity of some students working with no partner (i.e.individuals), some students having one partner, and some students having two partners because of absenteeism.We are aware of non-independence issues such as common fate and reciprocal influence that may impact ourresults (Cress, 2008). We measured the effect size with Pearson’s correlation coefficient (r) where 0.1 is a smalleffect size, 0.3 is a medium effect size, and 0.5 is a large effect size.Figure 3. Learning gains on the conceptually-oriented tutors. Conceptual test items on the left and proceduraltest items on the right. Collaborative students are black and individual students are light gray.First, we analyzed data from students who worked with the conceptually-oriented tutors. We testedwhether there were statistically significant pre/post learning gains and we compared the learning gains betweenstudents working individually and students working collaboratively. We did so separately (with separate HLMs)for gains on the conceptual test items and gains on procedural test items. For the conceptual test items, a significanteffect between pre and posttests was found with posttest having a higher score, t(74) = -9.29, p < .001, r = .73,while no significant effect for individual/collaborative learning, t(70) = -1.25, p = .22, r = .15, nor interaction,t(74) = 1.47, p = .15, r = .17, was found (see Figure 3). For the procedural test items, a significant effect betweenpre and posttests was found with posttest having a higher score, t(74) = -6.80, p < .001, r = .62, while no significanteffect for individual/collaborative learning, t(70) = 0.35, p = .72, r = .04, nor interaction, t(74) = 0.39, p = .70, r= .05, was found (see Figure 3). Thus, although there was learning from pretest to posttest on both conceptual andprocedural test items, there was no difference in learning between students working individually and studentsworking collaboratively. To investigate whether there was a difference in the time it took students to complete theposttest, we ran a t-test. No significant difference was found for the time it took students to complete the posttestbetween the students working individually and students working collaboratively, t(74) = -1.16, p = .25.Second, we analyzed data from students who worked with the procedurally-oriented tutors. We testedwhether there were statistically significant pre/post learning gains and we compared the learning gains betweenstudents working individually and collaboratively. We did so separately (with separate HLMs) for gains on theconceptual test items and gains on procedural test items. For the conceptual test items, a significant effect betweenpre and posttests was found with posttest having a higher score, t(68) = -4.49, p < .001, r = .48, while no significanteffect for individual/collaborative learning, t(64) = 0.68, p = .5, r = .08, nor interaction, t(68) = -0.56, p = .58,r = .07, was found (see Figure 4). For the procedural test items, a significant effect between pre and posttests wasICLS 2016 Proceedings342© ISLSfound with posttest having a higher score, t(68) = -8.40, p < .001, r = .71, while no significant effect forindividual/collaborative learning, t(64) = 0.04, p = .97, r = .005, nor interaction, t(68) = -0.57, p = .57, r = .07,was found (see Figure 4). Similar to what we found with the conceptually-oriented tutor, there was learning frompretest to posttest with the procedurally-oriented tutor, on both conceptual and procedural test items, but there wasno difference in learning between students working individually and students working collaboratively. Also, nosignificant difference was found for the time it took students to complete the posttest between the students workingindividually and students working collaboratively, t(68) = -0.49, p = .62.Figure 4. Learning gains on the procedurally-oriented tutors. Conceptual test items on the left and proceduraltest items on the right. Collaborative students are black and individual students are light gray.Time on ITSTable 1: Mean time and problems completed on the ITS for each condition and standard deviationsTutor MaterialsConceptually-orientedProcedurally-orientedSocial ModeCollaborativeIndividualCollaborativeIndividualTime in Minutes: M (SD)73.32 (13.24)84.16 (18.11)72.78 (13.34)84.11 (20.68)Problems Completed: M (SD)44.08 (11.73)45.24 (14.50)44.80 (10.29)45.30 (12.65)For the study, ample time was given to students to work with the ITS with the expectation that all students wouldcomplete all of problems for the assigned units. Using two t-tests, we found no difference between studentsworking individually or collaboratively in the number of problems completed for the conceptually-oriented tutors,t(74) = -0.38, p = .7, r = .04 or the procedurally-oriented tutors, t(68) = -0.18, p = .86, r = .02 (see Table 1).However, because the number of problems was fixed, students could work at their own pace and would finish thetutors at different times. Using two t-tests, there was a significant difference between students workingindividually/collaboratively on the time spent on the tutor for the conceptually-oriented tutors, t(74) = -2.99, p <.01, r = .33, and the procedurally-oriented tutors, t(68) = -2.78, p < .01, r = .32, where, surprisingly, studentsworking collaboratively spent less time on the ITS (see Table 1). The students working collaboratively were ableto complete the same number of problems as the students working individually but in less time.Discussion and implicationsThe results of our study showed significant learning gains for students working collaboratively with both theprocedurally-oriented and conceptually-oriented tutors. There was no difference in the learning gains of studentsworking collaboratively versus students working individually. However, students working collaborativelycompleted the same number of tutor problems in less time on the tutor. These results confirm our hypothesis thatyoung learners can be successfully supported in learning through the use of a collaborative ITS and indicate thata collaborative ITS is a viable option to use in the classroom.ICLS 2016 Proceedings343© ISLSThe results did not support our hypothesis that students working on conceptually-oriented tasks wouldbenefit more from collaboration and students working on procedurally-oriented tasks would benefit more fromworking individually. These results are consistent with the findings from our previous work where we also foundno difference in learning gains (Olsen et al., 2014a). However, learning with an ITS individually has been shownto be very successful, especially within mathematics (Ritter et al., 2007; Rau et al., 2012), and it may be verydifficult to design an intervention that can be added to an ITS to increase learning above what can be achievedworking individually. Collaboration adds an extra layer of complexity that might be expected to inhibit thelearning process, even within an ITS. Yet both in our previous work and in the current study, we found evidencethat collaborative learning with an ITS can be more efficient than learning individually with an ITS. In our priorstudy, students had the same learning gains when working collaboratively as when working individually, but theyhad practice with fewer problems (Olsen et al., 2014a). In our current study, all students solved the same numberof problems (i.e. had the same amount of practice), but the students working in the collaborative condition spentless time on the tutor. This was surprising; we expected to find the opposite (Lou et al., 2001). Collaboration mayincrease the time spent on each problem if students are discussing the solution. This is time that would not bespent in the individual condition. Our findings that students collaborating spent less time on the tutor could be dueto students making fewer errors when collaborating, so they spent less time fixing those errors. To investigate thisquestion, future work would need to analyze the learning that happened within the tutor and how it may havechanged over time. By analyzing the process data, we could better understand what actions the students weretaking with the tutor and where the efficiency gains were made.While the collaborating students learned as much as their classmates who worked individually withregard to domain knowledge, they may have had more of an opportunity to develop their math reasoning skillsand social skills by working with a partner. In a collaborative setting, students need to be able to construct theirarguments well enough for their partner to understand their reasoning and are given the opportunity to askquestions (Chi & Wylie, 2014). This provides them with the opportunity to develop their math reasoning and tocritique the reasoning of others. A next step would be to analyze the process data from the collaborative conditionsto assess what opportunities the students had to explain their mathematical reasoning and to understand what thecollaboration processes looked like that led to learning. A limitation of this study is that we did not assess socialskills or mathematical reasoning skills for the students, which is where we would expect students collaborating tobenefit beyond those working individually, as Rummel and Spada (2005) found that students who had anopportunity to collaborate had better knowledge about collaboration skills.In summary, our findings show that both collaborative and individual learning with an ITS can bebeneficial to young students. However, the process that the students go through for the learning may be differentwhen working collaboratively compared to individually as indicated by less time being spent working with thetutor when working collaboratively. Students may benefit from having the opportunity to work both individuallyand collaboratively in a domain. Future work is needed to investigate how to best combine individual andcollaborative learning and where in the process each would be appropriate. Individual and collaborative learningmay lead to different learning processes, which raises the intriguing possibility that a combination of these modesmight support more robust learning.ReferencesBaghaei, N., Mitrovic, A., & Irwin, W. (2007). Supporting collaborative learning and problem-solving in aconstraint-based CSCL environment for UML class diagrams. International Journal of ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, 2(2-3), 159-190. doi:10.1007/s11412-007-9018-0Chen, W., & Looi, C. K. (2013). Group scribbles-supported collaborative learning in a primary grade 5 scienceclass. In D. D. Suthers, K. Lund, C P. Rosé, C. Teplovs, & N. Law (Eds.), Productive Multivocality inthe Analysis of Group Interactions (pp. 257-263). Springer US.Chi, M. T., & Wylie, R. (2014). The ICAP framework: Linking cognitive engagement to active learningoutcomes. Educational Psychologist, 49(4), 219-243.Common Core State Standards Initiative (2015). Standards for Mathematical Practice: Construct viable argumentsandcritiquethereasoningofothers.RetrievedNovember10,2015fromhttp://www.corestandards.org/Math/Practice/MP3/Cress, U. (2008). The need for considering multilevel analysis in CSCL research–An appeal for the use of moreadvanced statistical methods. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning,3(1), 69–84.Diziol, D., Walker, E., Rummel, N., & Koedinger, K. R. (2010). Using intelligent tutor technology to implementadaptive support for student collaboration. Educational Psychology Review, 22(1), 89-102.ICLS 2016 Proceedings344© ISLSHausmann, R. G., Chi, M. T., & Roy, M. (2004). Learning from collaborative problem solving: An analysis ofthree hypothesized mechanisms. In K.D. Rorbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings for 26ndAnnual Conference of the Cognitive Science society (pp. 547-552). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Hesse, F. W. (2006). Collaboration scripts–a conceptual analysis. EducationalPsychology Review, 18(2), 159-185.Lazakidou, G., & Retalis, S. (2010). Using computer supported collaborative learning strategies for helpingstudents acquire self-regulated problem-solving skills in mathematics. Computers & Education, 54(1),3-13.Lou, Y., Abrami, P. C., & d’Apollonia, S. (2001). Small group and individual learning with technology: A metaanalysis. Review of Educational Research, 71(3), 449-521.Mercer, N., & Sams, C. (2006). Teaching children how to use language to solve maths problems. Language andEducation, 20(6), 507-528.Moss, J. (2005). Pipes, Tubes, and Beakers: New approaches to teaching the rational-number system. In J.Brantsford & S. Donovan (Eds.), How people learn: A targeted report for teachers (pp. 309-349).Washington DC: National Academy Press.Mullins, D., Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2011). Are two heads always better than one? Differential effects ofcollaboration on students’ computer-supported learning in mathematics. International Journal ofComputer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6(3), 421-443.Murray, T. (2003). An overview of intelligent tutoring system authoring tools: Updated analysis of the state ofthe art. In T. Murray, S. B. Blessing, & S. Ainsworth (Eds.), Authoring tools for advanced technologylearning environments (pp. 491-544). Springer Netherlands.Olsen, J. K., Belenky, D. M., Aleven, V., & Rummel, N. (2014a). Using an intelligent tutoring system to supportcollaborative as well as individual learning. In S. Trausan-Matu, K. E. Boyer, M. Crosby, & K. Panourgia(Eds.), Proceedings for 12th International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (pp. 134-144).Berlin: Springer.Olsen, J. K., Belenky, D. M., Aleven, V., Rummel, N., Sewall, J., & Ringenberg, M. (2014b). Authoring tools forcollaborative intelligent tutoring system environments. In S. Trausan-Matu, K. E. Boyer, M. Crosby, &K. Panourgia (Eds.), Proceedings for 12th International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (pp.523-528). Berlin: Springer.Rau, M. A., Aleven, V., Rummel, N., & Rohrbach, S. (2012). Sense making alone doesn’t do it: Fluency matterstoo! ITS Support for robust learning with multiple representations. In S. A. Cerri, W. J. Clancey, G.Papadourakis, & K. Panourgia (Eds.), Proceedings for 11th International Conference on IntelligentTutoring Systems (pp. 174-184). Berlin: Springer.Rittle-Johnson, B., Siegler, R. S., & Alibali, M. W. (2001). Developing conceptual understanding and proceduralskill in mathematics: An iterative process. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93(2), 346-362.Ritter, S., Anderson, J. R., Koedinger, K. R., & Corbett, A. (2007). Cognitive Tutor: Applied research inmathematics education. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14(2), 249-255.Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate: An instructional approach to promoting collaborativeproblem solving in computer-mediated settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 201-241.Slavin, R. E. (1989). Cooperative learning and student achievement: Six theoretical perspectives. Advances inMotivation and Achievement, 6, 161-177. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, Inc.Teasley, S. D. (1995). The role of talk in children's peer collaborations. Developmental Psychology, 31(2), 207220.Tsuei, M. (2011). Development of a peer­assisted learning strategy in computer­supported collaborative learningenvironments for elementary school students. British Journal of Educational Technology, 42(2), 214232.Walker, E., Rummel, N., & Koedinger, K. R. (2009). CTRL: A research framework for providing adaptivecollaborative learning support. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 19(5), 387-431.VanLehn, K. (2011). The relative effectiveness of human tutoring, intelligent tutoring systems, and other tutoringsystems. Educational Psychologist, 46(4), 197-221.AcknowledgmentsWe thank Amos Glenn, Ran Liu, and the CTAT team for their help. This work was supported by Graduate TrainingGrant # R305B090023 and by Award # R305A120734 from the US Department of Education (IES).ICLS 2016 Proceedings345© ISLS