A Preliminary Study of University Students’ Collaborative LearningBehavior Patterns in the Context of Online Argumentation LearningActivities: The Role of Idea-Centered Collaborative ArgumentationInstructionYing-Tien Wu, Li-Jen Wang, and Teng-Yao Chengytwu@cl.ncu.edu.tw, wanglr38@gmail.com, ttcheng0932@gmail.comGraduate Institute of Network Learning Technology, National Central University, TaiwanAbstract: Learners have more and more opportunities to encounter a variety of socio-scientificissues (SSIs) and they may have difficulties in collaborative argumentation on SSIs. Knowledgebuilding is a theory about idea-centered collaborative knowledge innovation and creation. Theapplication of idea-centered collaboration practice as emphasized in knowledge building maybe helpful for facilitating students’ collaborative argumentation. To examine the perspectiveabove, this study attempted to integrate idea-centered collaboration into argumentation practice.The participants were 48 university students and were randomly divided into experimental andcontrol group (n= 24 for both groups). The control group only received argumentationinstruction, while the experimental group received explicit idea-centered collaborativeargumentation (CA) instruction. This study found that two groups of students revealed differentcollaborative learning behavior patterns. It is also noted that the students in the experimentalgroup benefited more in collaborative argumentation from the proper adaption of knowledgebuilding and explicit idea-centered collaborative argumentation instruction.IntroductionIn the knowledge-based societies, learners have more and more opportunities to encounter a variety of socialdilemmas coming with rapid development in science and technologies. These social dilemmas are often termed“Socio-scientific issues (SSIs)” which are controversial social issues that are generally ill-structured, open-endedauthentic problems which have multiple solutions (Sadler, 2004; Sadler & Zeidler, 2005). When trying to findbetter solutions, learners may need to be involved in SSI-based argumentation learning activities in order to findbetter ideas reaching consensuses and achieve compromise solutions (Walker & Zeidler, 2007).Beretier and Scardamalia (2003) distinguished between “belief mode” and “design mode” in work withideas. If activities that are related to ideas evaluating, questioning, accepting, or rejecting knowledge claims, theybelong to “belief mode”; whereas the activities have broader range that are related to knowledge production,improvement, searching for better ideas, they belong to “design mode” (Beretier and Scardamalia, 2014). It shouldbe noticed that SSI-based argumentation sometimes falls in the situation of win-or-lose argumentation which arenot in collaborative manner or related to idea refinement. In other words, SSI-based argumentation is oftenimplemented as the “belief mode” activity. To address the aforementioned issues, argumentation practiceemphasizing idea-centered collaboration that is adapted from knowledge building could be promising. Knowledgebuilding emphasizes the importance of creating knowledge jointly in a community, and it describes what acommunity of learners needs to accomplish in order to improve ideas and create knowledge (Scardamalia &Bereiter, 1994; 2003; 2006). The adaption of idea-centered collaborative argumentation regarding a SSI may turnthe win-or-lose situations of SSI-based argumentation into more community knowledge refinement situations.That is to say, turning the “belief mode” argumentation to “design mode” one. Therefore, in the study, ideacentered collaboration argumentation learning activities were designed and implemented.Moreover, as revealed in previous research, students often have limited argumentation skills. Forexample, they often have difficulties in generating counter-arguments due to the lack of knowledge of differentperspectives (Leitao, 2003). To improve students’ argumentation skills, previous research has suggested the useof explicit instruction in argumentation (e.g., Andriessen, 2006). However, relevant studies are still not availablein SSI-based collaborative argumentation contexts. Therefore, this study also examined the effectiveness ofexplicit instruction that focuses on both collaboration and argumentation skills in students’ SSI-basedargumentation. To sum up, this study is one of the initial attempts trying to exam the role of explicit idea-centeredcollaboration argumentation in students’ argumentation practice. The research questions are as follows:1. When implementing KB-based SSI argumentation learning activities, how these two groups of studentsCSCL 2017 Proceedings640© ISLSwith different instructions (idea-centered collaborative argumentation instruction vs. argumentationinstruction only) differ in terms of their knowledge building behavior patterns?2. When implementing KB-based SSI argumentation learning activities, how these two groups of studentswith different instructions (idea-centered collaborative argumentation instruction vs. argumentationinstruction only) differ in terms of collaborative argumentation behavior patterns?MethodsParticipants and learning contextsThe participants in this study were two classes of 48 students (14 men and 34 women, mean age 21 ± 3 years) ina university in southern Taiwan. They were students from different departments and institutes who took the sameacademic course (from March to June 2016) called “Science, Technology and Society”. The study started fromMarch to May in 2016. All the participants were taught by the same teacher who had been using knowledgebuilding pedagogy and Knowledge Forum in the classroom for over one year. Participants from the two classeswere randomly divided into two groups (Experimental Group n= 24; Control Group n= 24). In each group, 4participants were also randomly assigned into a small group for knowledge building-based argumentation learningactivities. There were 6 small groups in the experimental and the control group respectively.Idea-centered collaborative argumentation instruction and Knowledge ForumThere were three phases in this study. In the first phase, all participants were required to read articles or listen toacademic speeches about different SSIs topics, such as energy, climate, and environment issues. In this phase, theparticipant teacher also gave a mini lesson of collaborative knowledge innovation and creation (based on theknowledge building core principles) to the participants. Then the students were given a SSI topic for discussionin Knowledge Forum (KF) for four weeks. To ensure participants’ familiarity and the quality of discourses inKnowledge Forum, further in-class discussions and feedbacks were given at the end of phase 1.In the second phase, both groups received a two-week instruction in class. The control group receivedargumentation instruction including the concept of arguments, counter arguments, and how to do rebuttals. In theinstruction phase, a mini lesson of argumentation was given to the participants. The participant teacher gave somequestions to the participants to discuss in class (e.g. Why argumentation skill is important for you? What is theresult of argumentation?). Then, the participant teacher taught them the definition of argumentation and its stepby step skills. Finally, SSIs topics that the participants have learned were used in argumentation practices in class.For the experimental group, besides the aforementioned argumentation instruction, they also received theinstruction focusing on the idea-centered collaboration argumentation. They learned the phrases which showingidea-centered collaboration and practice saying them in the argumentation practice (e.g. I am looking forward toseeing my group member’s opinion. I think it is a good idea. I think the idea can be listed into our consensus).The purpose of idea-centered collaborative argumentation instruction was to help the group members have deeperunderstanding on the topic and reach consensus at the end. (Sadler, 2011). The students in the experimental grouplearned how to cooperate with other group members in argumentation, how to conduct collaborativeargumentation like scientists do. They especially focused on how to make arguments collaboratively. They werealso encouraged to provide evidence and justify them within their groups.In the final phase, a highly controversial SSI topic in Taiwan, “There are many ways to solve the powershortage issue in Taiwan, such as thermal power, hydroelectric, nuclear power. What could be the better solutionby using these different approaches?” was given to the two groups for argumentation for four weeks. Allparticipants were required to discuss the topic anonymously in class and asynchronously in KF. The control groupused the normal openers provided in Knowledge Forum, while openers related to collaborative argumentationwere also provided to the students in experimental groups additionally. At the end of this phase, each group neededto synthesize their ideas and finish a group report.In traditional classrooms, students may feel shy or frustrated when they express their ideas in public. Inparticular, they may not propose their arguments because they are afraid of losing face or may fight against withothers especially in the face to face interaction environment (e.g. in the classroom) (Andriessen, 2006).Researchers suggest that learners may also need technology helping them to work together when they are involvedin collaborative argumentation learning activities (Clark et. al., 2010; Noroozi et. al., 2012). In this study,Knowledge Forum is adopted to promote learning equity and improve their argumentation performances.Scardamalia (2004) described that the KF scaffolds help students clarify and organize the writing of their conceptsin a note and help students focus on particular aspects of the knowledge-building process when exchangingCSCL 2017 Proceedings641© ISLSinformation, working in ways similar to a scientific group. In this study, several KB principles were enacted. Forexample, the ideas are real and authentic (Real ideas and authentic problems), students continuingly refine,generalize and synthesize the ideas (Rise above), every group member possesses equal right and take equivalentresponsibility for advancing community knowledge (Collective responsibility for community knowledge).Data collection and analysisThe primary data sources were students’ online entries (notes) in Knowledge Forum in the final phase. Studentsposted notes whenever they had free time outside the classroom. The students in both groups were encouraged topost notes with openers. In the study, there were 327 entries and 425 entries in the control group and experimentalgroup respectively.In this study, two coding schemes, the knowledge building coding scheme and the collaborativeargumentation scheme were used to analyze students’ entries in both the groups. The knowledge building codingscheme includes “My idea (KF1)”, “I need to understand (KF2)”, “New information (KF3)”, “This idea cannotexplain (KF4)”, “A better idea (KF5)”, “Putting our knowledge together (KF6)”. This coding scheme is exactlythe same as the openers in Knowledge Forum. The collaborative argumentation coding scheme is adopted fromMcAlister, Ravenscroft and Scanlon (2004), it includes “Inform (CA1)”, “Question (CA2)”, “Challenge (CA3)”,“Reason (CA4)”, “Support (CA5)”, and “Others (CA6)”. All the entries were arranged according to the two codingschemes respectively and were given appropriate codes by the authors separately. The authors then discussed thecodes regularly. If the authors had different opinions on the codes, they discussed the differences until they hadreached the consensus. In other words, each students’ note was given both a knowledge building code and acollaborative argumentation code. After the qualitative coding, Lag Sequential Analysis (LSA) was adopted toanalyze the sequential correlations between chronologically ordered behaviors including the group knowledgebuilding behavioral patterns and collaborative argumentation behavioral patterns. The method was utilized tovisualize the sequential correlations between chronologically ordered behaviors (Bakeman & Gottman, 1997; Hou,2012; Hou & Wu, 2011). The inter-coder reliability is greater than 0.8. Authors discussed and reached consensusif any disagreements occurred.Results and discussionFigure 1 shows the results derived from the Lag Sequential Analysis of students’ knowledge building behavioralpatterns (see Figure 1, Left). In the experimental group, “New Information (KF3)” and “This idea cannot explain(KF4)” indicated the significant sequences; “Putting our knowledge together (KF6)” shows significant selfsequence. It seems that when there was new information regarding an idea proposed, the students in theexperimental group significantly tended to challenge the idea with new information. Also they significantly tendedto synthesize their ideas together frequently. However, no significant sequences were found in the control group.The results indicate that the implementation of collaborative argumentation instruction in the experimental groupmay improve their ideas and help them synthesize their ideas regarding a SSI.Figure 1. Knowledge building behavioral Patterns between the two groups (Left) and Collaborativeargumentation behavioral Patterns between the two groups (Right).Figure 1 also shows the results derived from the LSA of collaborative argumentation behavioral patternsin the two groups (see Figure 1, Right). Both the groups revealed significant collaborative argumentationbehavioral sequences, but their learning patterns are various. In experimental group, “Inform (CA1)” and“Question (CA2)” indicate the significant sequences, “Challenge (CA3)” and “Reason (CA4)” both showCSCL 2017 Proceedings642© ISLSsignificant self-sequences. It indicates that the students in experimental group tended to elaborate new ideas orarguments after they were proposed. Besides, they also tended to refine their arguments or challenge newarguments, and they tended to reason and synthesize their arguments. It is noted that in the control group,“Question (CA2)” shows significant self-sequence and has significant sequence with “Others (CA6)”. However,in the control group, students tended to ask questions again and again, indicating that they might always fail toclarify their arguments. Besides, after asking questions to clarify existing arguments, they also tended to be offtask or lost focus. In sum, the students in the experimental group benefited more from the explicit idea-centeredcollaborative argumentation instruction in this study in terms of their idea and argument refinement and achievinga synthesized solution regarding a SSI. On the contrary, the control group may not refine their arguments regardingSSI due to their win-or-lose or off-task patterns.ConclusionThis study was one of the initial attempts to adapt the idea-centered collaboration argumentation regarding a SSI.Both argumentation instruction and explicit idea-centered collaborative argumentation instruction wereimplemented in this study. By analyzing the students’ knowledge building and collaborative argumentationbehavioral patterns, the results showed that KB-instruction is useful for improving collaborative argumentation(Scardamalia and Bereiter, 1994). However, the two groups of students revealed different collaborativeargumentation and knowledge building behavior patterns. The students in the experimental group benefited morein both their knowledge building and collaborative argumentation learning processes from the proper adoptionexplicit idea-centered collaboration argumentation instruction in online SSI-based argumentation learningactivities. They tended to synthesize their ideas and find the better solution at the end. The findings of this studymay provide researchers, educators, designers with a useful basis for improving learners’ ability of collaborativeargumentation.LimitationsThis study has some limitations within which our findings need to be interpreted carefully. First, the study was apreliminary experiment which may need more careful design. Second, because of the time limit, this study was ashort-term experiment conducted with only a small size of population. To generalize the results for larger groups,future studies should have involved more participants.Selected referencesBereiter, C. & Scardamalia, M. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: One concept, two hills toclimb. In S. C. Tan, H. J. So, J. Yeo (Eds.) Knowledge creation in education (pp. 35-52). Singapore:Springer.Hong, H.-Y., & Chiu, C. H. (2015). Understanding how students perceive the role of ideas for their knowledgework in a knowledge building environment. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 2016,32(1), 32-46.Hong, H.-Y., Chang, Y. H., & Chai, C. S. (2014). Fostering a collaborative and creative climate in a college classthrough idea-centered knowledge-building. Instructional Science, 42(3), 389-407.Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In Sawyer (Ed.),Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 97-118). New York: Cambridge University Press.AcknowledgementsFunding of this research work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan, under grantnumbers MOST 103-2511-S-008 -007 -MY3 and MOST 104-2511-S-008 -015 -MY3.CSCL 2017 Proceedings643© ISLS