The Learning Experiences of Youth Online Information BrokersJason C. Yip, University of Washington – Seattle, jcyip@uw.eduCarmen Gonzalez, University of Washington – Seattle, cmgonzal@uw.eduVikki Katz, Rutgers University, vkatz@rutgers.eduAbstract: In the U.S., there is a large proportion of families where one or both parents areEnglish language learners (ELL). Children in these families often serve important roles asbrokers, by engaging their linguistic capabilities, cultural familiarity, and technological skillsto bridge their families’ access to information resources. Despite the central role that childbrokers play, scholars know little about how they search for, interpret, and translate onlineinformation. Using data from an exploratory study with Latino youth (ages 11-14) that involvedinterviews, online search tasks, and group discussions, we investigate the learning processes,challenges, and strategies that youth employ as they broker online information for their ELLparents.IntroductionIn multiethnic and multinational countries like the U.S., many immigrants face linguistic, cultural, andtechnological barriers to accessing information. To cope with these obstacles, parents as English language learners(ELL) often depend on their bilingual children to act as intermediaries to interpret and translate information (Katz,2014B; Orellana, 2001). These youth often act as brokers through facilitating their parents’ connections withtechnology and information (Katz, 2014B). Currently communities in the U.S. are experiencing demographicshifts in which youth brokering is becoming more prominent. In 2012, there were 25 million ELL individuals (9%of the population) ages 5 and older in the U.S. (Pandya, Batalova, & McHugh, 2011). This reflects an 80% growthin the number of ELL individuals between 1990 and 2010 (13 million in 1990 to 25 million in 2010). While priorstudies document how youth brokers interpret a wide range of information (e.g., cultural, linguistic) for their ELLparents (e.g., Katz, 2014B; Orellana, 2001), we have less information about how these youths utilize informationcommunication technologies (ICTs) and digital literacy skills and knowledge for brokering practices.Without a deeper understanding of this phenomenon, we risk overlooking ways in which youth brokersdevelop creative learning strategies to negotiate high-pressure situations as they access vital information for theirfamilies. Connected learning is a learning process that is driven by personal interests, encouraged with peer andfamily support, and helps learners connect their out-of-school pursuits to formal academic and career possibilities(Ito et al., 2012). Youth brokers often facilitate information for ELL parents and build bridges between home andschool (Orellana, 2001). By becoming more familiar with the challenges that youth brokers face during onlinesearching for families, and what strategies they develop to support their families’ information needs, we areseeking to develop more informed strategies to promote connected learning as part of supporting family learningand wellbeing. Our investigation expands work in the fields of information and communication by examiningyouth online brokers’ processes and experiences as they navigate complex online information. Our focus onbrokering moves away from a deficit perspective, which presumes families lack knowledge resources, and insteadhighlights the strategies that online brokers employ to broaden their information access. Therefore, our researchquestions are:•RQ1. What learning roles do online information brokers play with their parents?•RQ2. What strategies and challenges shape learning roles in online information brokers?RQ3. What are the affordances and limitations of digital technologies in brokering and learning?First, we situate our investigation within prior research on youth brokering. Next, we highlight ourtheoretical framework using Vygotsky’s (1978) social development theory and its affordance to understandinglearning in youth online brokering. Finally, we present our findings and conclude with an examination of the roleof digital literacy in online brokering, including and what opportunities are available for connected learning.•BackgroundYouth brokering for limited English proficient familiesLower-socioeconomic (SES) parents with limited English-language proficiency in the U.S. often depend on theirchildren to search and interpret online information, since important resources (e.g., healthcare, education, socialservices) are predominately available in English (Katz, 2014A; 2014B). However, when online information isICLS 2016 Proceedings362© ISLStranslated into non-English languages, ELL parents may face accessibility issues related to limited literacy andeducation, cultural knowledge, and technical skills and access. For instance, websites translated into Spanishtypically use one dialect; however, there are 20 distinct dialects of limited mutual intelligibility (Thompson, 1992).This makes reading and understanding translations from English difficult. As such, the responsibility of translatingweb content falls into the hands of the children of these ELL families. Although community resources andinstitutions can provide help with translation, information brokering is primarily an in-home activity. For instance,public libraries can offer help for information search, but lower-SES immigrant families may not access theseresources due to busy work schedules, or fear of institutions (Gehner, 2010).The role of learning in youth brokeringAlthough brokering can be quite a difficult task for youth, researchers from education, sociology, andcommunication have documented important opportunities for positive learning outcomes. Children often musttake on “adult roles” as they become experts on behalf of their family; this reframing of roles often provides newlearning opportunities (Eksner & Orellana, 2012). For youth, the act of brokering depends on high-leveldevelopment of cognitive and social skill sets (Hall & Sham, 2007). Language brokering and biculturalism inyouth has shown a positive role in Latino adolescent students’ academic performance (Buriel, Perez, Terri,Chavez, & Moran, 1998).Orellana’s (2001) use of sociocultural theory to examine longitudinal studies of children’s brokering hascontributed towards the understanding of skills development in both youth brokers and their parents. Youthparticipation with their families’ needs can help them engage in civic opportunities, character formation, and buildstronger ties with their families (Orellana, 2001). For instance, Katz (2014A) notes that youth brokers often neededto translate complex health and medical information from doctors. Children framed these experiences with doctorsas educational and informative of health issues. Treating these interactions as learning experiences helped tomitigate the difficulty of youth managing their parents and health providers’ expectations. Eksner and Orellana(2012) demonstrate the ways that language brokering with parents contributes to youth’s knowledge of the socialworld, skills development in home language and English, problem-solving skills towards meaning-making, andother learning opportunities. Katz (2014A; 2014B) examines media brokering and how children facilitate theirparents’ understanding through media artifacts (e.g., print, online media) and mediated communication (e.g.,phone calls, Internet). While current studies frame cultural, language, and media brokering as important to youthbrokers’ development and learning, less is known the role of online information search and brokering for youthand their ELL families.Theoretical frameworkThe analyses presented in this study are guided by Vygotsky’s (1978) social development theory, which positsthat children’s learning and development cannot be separated from the early interactions with parents and othersignificant people in their lives. Development does not occur in universal stages; cultural context and social factorsplay a large role in shaping learning. Vygotsky’s “zone of proximal development” is the opportunity for childrento engage in experimentation and social interaction to support learning beyond their individual capabilities.Therefore, in order for children to develop, they need access to more knowledgeable others, mainly parents, peers,and other significant people in their lives. When youth broker information for their families, such close andfocused interactions can present learning opportunities for both the children and their parents.Vygotskian theory (Vygotsky, 1978) suggests that these brokering moments can be quite powerful forlearning. Youth brokers are guided by more expert others in language and home culture (i.e., parents, extendedfamily). However, youth brokers must also act in an “expert” position, in which they articulate their understandingof complex online information to their parents, who are learning from their children (Dorner, Orellana, & LiGrining, 2007). In this study, we specifically examine these learning interactions around digital technology, aphenomenon known as joint media engagement (Takeuchi & Stevens, 2011). Today, new ICTs have madecollaborative learning between adults and children more two-way and less defined by parental authority. Whilewe know more about learning together with children and families in mainstream populations (Barron, Martin,Takeuchi, & Fithian, 2009), we know that youth brokers are both teaching and learning about technology,developing fluency in their language, and code switching (Katz, 2014B). Therefore, joint media engagement inELL immigrant families are quite diverse with families’ different priorities, challenges, and motivations (Katz &Gonzalez, 2015).MethodologyICLS 2016 Proceedings363© ISLSThis study focuses on how youth brokers engage in online information problem-solving tasks. This is a qualitative,exploratory research study that utilized semi-structured interviews, information search tasks for youth, and groupdiscussions with youth.Context and participantsWe conducted this study with 10 youth participants (Table 1, 9 different families, all names are pseudonyms) whomet the following criteria: 1) Self-identifies as the child of a Latin American immigrant; 2) Has at least one parentwith limited facility in verbal or written English; 3) Between ages 11 to 14; and 4) Reports helping his/her parent(s)understand and navigate online content and ICTs.Table 1: Demographic information of the youth brokersName (Pseudonym) and ageAmanda (age 13)Bella (age 14)Country of originSpain (mother)*Dominican RepublicBetty (age 12)Don (age 11)Dominican RepublicDominican RepublicFernando (age 13)Jennifer (age 11)Dominican RepublicEcuador (mother) and Mexico(father)Dominican RepublicEcuadorMexicoFamily characteristics2 sisters (ages 5 and 9) and mom3 older sisters, 1 older brother (siblings not home)and mom1 brother (age 23), 1 sister (age 21), mom and dad1 brother (age 23), 3 sisters (ages 23, 20, and 18),mom and dad1 sister (age 18, not home), mom and dad1 brother (age 8), 1 sister (age 6), mom and dadMarina (age 12)1 sister (age 18), mom and dadNina (age 13)1 brother (age 17), momRicardo (age 13) and Raphael3 brothers (ages 7, 14 and 18), mom and dad, aunt(age 13) (twins)and older cousin (18)*We included this participant because her family identified themselves as Latino. While her mother is from Spain, shedid not report where her father is from. She has strong family connections to the Dominican Republic.This study occurred in a major metropolitan area in the Northeast U.S. In the middle school where we recruitedparticipants, 72% of children were receiving free- or reduced-cost meals and 59% were Latin American. We choseLatin Americans as the focal group for this study because they are the fastest growing “minority” group in theU.S. (US Census Bureau, 2012), have the highest rates of ELL individuals, and report youth brokering as acommon phenomenon (e.g.,Orellana, 2001). In 2010, the Latino population in the U.S. accounted for 66% of theoverall ELL population (16 million ELL Latinos) (Pandya et al., 2011).Prior studies on youth Internet search studies have ranged between 30 and 90 interviews (e.g., Druin etal., 2009; Foss et al., 2013). Our sample size was smaller because (a) the study was meant to be exploratory andlay the foundation for a future study; and (b) brokering is a phenomenon that is not evenly distributed across apopulation, and that children do not necessarily admit to brokering for family information (Katz, 2014B).Furthermore, given that we were looking to identify children of immigrants, anxieties related to residency statusprevented a broad sampling of the school’s students. However, prior qualitative research establishes that smallsamples (5 – 12 interviews and participants) have utility for theory building in new research areas (Baker &Edwards, 2012). We limited our investigation to youth between 11 and 14 years old because prior researchindicated that middle school marks the beginning of parents’ intensive dependence on children’s brokering skills(Hall & Sham, 2007).Research design and data collectionThe instrumentation for this study is an adapted information search protocol from Bilal (2002) and Foss et al.(2013). We conducted 10 one-on-one interviews and search tasks with youth brokers in four sessions in anafterschool setting. After individual interviews, respondents participated in a moderated group discussion abouttheir brokering experiences. Four of the five researchers on this project spoke Spanish proficiently or fluently andwere able to engage in Spanish dialogue with the youth.Interviews and search tasks: We used a semi-structured interview protocol (Merriam, 2009) to allow usto focus on our research questions, but with enough flexibility to identify emergent issues. We asked questionsabout family demographics, ICT usage, and general search behavior. Next, for 40 minutes, we asked youth toengage in a series of search tasks that were self-generated, imposed, simple, and complex. Self-generated tasksfocus on searches with fewer constraints (Bilal, 2002; Gross, 1999). Imposed tasks provide limitations for childrento search for information they would not normally search for (Gross, 2006). Simple tasks are baseline search tasksICLS 2016 Proceedings364© ISLSto make sure children can do basic searches (Bilal, 2002). Finally, complex tasks provide a challenge and allowus to see how persistent and resourceful children are at searches (Bilal, 2002). Based on these criteria, we askedrespondents to engage in the following tasks using school laptops:1. If your parent needed information on the public schools in this area, what information would you lookup for them? (imposed and simple task)2. Can you show me how you find information for something your parents have asked you to search before?(imposed task)3. Can you show me how you find information for a problem you think your parents might have today?(self-generated task)4. If one of your parents wasn’t feeling well or had been sick for a few days and wanted to know why, whatinformation would you look up for them? (imposed and complex task)During these search tasks, we had the respondent narrate how they were conducting the search and their opinionson the task. We video recorded screen interactions as the children explained their search tasks. During this time,we asked children to search as if their parents were present.Group interviews and field notes: After the search tasks, we had the youth engage in a 20-minute groupdiscussion about how they search for information for their ELL parents. Each group discussion (four total) hadtwo to three youth from the interview sessions and two to three researchers. We conducted these group discussionsto better understand what aspects of these experiences appear to be common among youth online brokers. Aftereach session, we generated individual summative memos of our experiences and contributed to efforts to interpretthe collected data, to varying degrees.Data analysisThe data for analysis consisted of verbatim individual and group interview transcripts, transcripts of the videorecordings, and detailed field notes constituted. We adhered to the inductive analytical approach developed byStrauss and Corbin (2007), to develop themes and categories to capture children’s search and learning experiencesfor their ELL parents. Two researchers open-coded the data independently for themes, such as parental interaction,affect, search challenges and frustrations, and strategies for brokering. We categorized, sorted, and compared thethemes to further develop categories for analysis. We then systematically compared and contrasted the themesbetween the researchers. Following the open-coding analysis, we used axial coding to make connections betweena category and its subcategories more explicit. We used selective coding to see if additional categories wereneeded. This sorting, comparing and contrasting was performed until we reached theoretical saturation and thatno new codes or categories were generated.FindingsWe present our findings based on our research questions. First, we outline the learning roles children and theirfamilies take on in the online brokering process. Second, we highlight the different challenges and creativestrategies that online youth brokers engaged in. Finally, we examine the affordances and limitations of ICTs forlearning in the process of online youth brokering.Child and family roles in online brokering and learningYouth brokers in this study indicated that their parents’ requests for information were a product of the specifickinds of challenges each family faced. Although we did not interview parents, we were able to ask youth brokerswhat kind of online searchers their parents commonly assigned to them. We characterized one set of tasks as “nonurgent searches”; that is, searches that are important, but low in priority. These searches include maps anddirections, online shopping, access to entertainment (e.g., videos, music), news, and recipes. Youth also indicated“urgent searchers”; these online searchers are high priority and relate to complex life issues such as health andmedicine, school choice, and immigration issues. For all these searches, children take on a myriad of roles inlearning and teaching with their parents. For example, youth brokers act as synthesizers and must quickly gleanand explain information, their level of understanding operates across a spectrum of varying information. Some ofthese summaries of information are conducted in Spanish, even though the information is in English. For instance,we asked Betty to describe how she would explain information about school rankings to her mother; she did so inSpanish as the interviewer played the role of her mother:Betty: Mira mami, estos son los mejores escuelas que hay en la ciudad. [Look mom, these arethe best schools that there are in the city]. Mira, estos son las Matemáticas y el Ingles. Y mira,ICLS 2016 Proceedings365© ISLScomo están haciendo entre las escuelas. Ellos hacen mejor que los otros en una escuela comoesta, 4.0 y este 3.7. Quiere decir que esta es mejor que esta. [Look this is Math and English.And look at how the schools are doing. They are doing better than others in a school like thisone, 4.0 and this one 3.7. That means that this one is better than this one.]Although all ten youths indicated they conducted online brokering, not all youth brokers had the sameskills for translation. Some youth brokers (Don and Marina) had developing Spanish skills and mostly relied on acombination of online consumer machine translation tools (i.e., Google Translate™) and their limited Spanishfluency. Other youth brokers were so fluent in Spanish that they acted not only as translators, but more engagededitors. For example, Fernando would spend time correcting longer Google Translate™ outputs for his parents toread (which could take up to an hour). We observed in this study that all the youth who were brokering urgentonline information for their ELL families needed strong literacy skills in both English and Spanish. For somefamilies, there is a high expectation that their children can translate any information. Bella noted, “We don't getrecognition because it’s something we’re supposed to do, if you're in a Dominican family. No, I’m serious; you’resupposed to do it, you have to be the kid and translate.”Parents were not only depending on their children for online information brokering, they needed theirchildren as technology specialists. Many parents were learning about technology from the youth brokers, as theywere searching online together. For instance, Oscar explained how he was helping his mother understand how toaccess her paycheck online: “I was helping her log on and then…As I was helping her, I didn’t know what herpassword was and stuff…So I told her where to put it, then. So my mom didn’t know where to put it anywhere.”Other youth brokers explained that while they were searching for online information, they found themselves oftenteaching their parents how to address technical issues with the devices they were using. Interestingly, Bettyindicated it was her mom that first taught her how to use the computer to search online. In this case, some ELLparents do have technology literacy to work with children on basic understandings of digital tools. As theirchildren progress with the technology, parents may be asking for help with more advanced functionalities.To be as resourceful as possible, youth needed to take on social mediation roles to find the help theyneeded as they searched for and interpreted information for their families. The online brokers had high relianceon their social networks to support such tasks. Respondents received help from the other parent, older siblings,extended family members, and even teachers and neighbors. The family unit itself takes on a inquirer role insocial learning; that is, parents and other family members provide imposed queries (Gross, 1999) to the youthbrokers, which often forces the youth out of their comfort zone. For example, the youth brokers in this studyneeded to search for things like Remicade (a drug) that may cause cancer, phyllodes tumors, immigration policiesin online news sources, and school choice issue. These high-priority imposed queries, while incredibly difficult,push youth to be exposed to new online information they may not normally search for on their own personalinterests. Unlike homework assignments from teachers, which can be ignored or forgotten, these online brokeringtasks are obligations for youth and cannot be easily dismissed. This is a unique opportunity for learning to occurin a less structured way around technology. Both the ELL parent and the child interact in joint media engagementand can learn from the online search and brokering experience.Challenges and strategies in online brokering for learningAlthough learning together through online brokering processes can help strengthen family bonds (Katz, 2014),there are many challenges to learning that youth brokers encounter. The first challenge is dealing with familypressures; youth brokers indicated stress and mistrust in working together with ELL parents. Although technologyfor search is becoming more mobile (i.e., smartphones, tablets), the youth in this study indicated that their ELLparents preferred large displays from laptops and desktops so that they could sit together with their children in thebrokering process. However, Nina noted the frustration of having her mother next to her: “For me, sometimes Iwant to, like, find the right thing [online], but…I take a long time reading and then [my mom is] like, ‘Okay, canyou please hurry up?’ or something. I’m like, ‘I’m trying to find the correct information for you, so relax!’” Someyouth indicated their ELL parents did not trust their children’s online activity, which lead the parents to sit andmonitor their children’s search practices. Amanda explained, “If their instincts tell them we're doing somethingwrong, they go crazy; like, “No, we're doing something wrong. That's not the right way.” But you don't knowwhat it means, so why are you saying that?” Despite the tensions that the respondents noted, it is important toemphasize the shared commitment, persistence, and collaboration around these family needs.A second challenge towards learning we observed was the developing digital literacy skills in the youthbrokers. Digital literacy refers to the cognitive, motor, emotional, and sociological skills necessary to interpretand synthesize a wide range of digital information from multiple sources (e.g., Eisenberg, 2010). One of thepressing issues the youth faced in online brokering tasks was comprehending technical words and phrases.ICLS 2016 Proceedings366© ISLSMedical terminology, immigration policy terms, school choice, and even common everyday terms (e.g.,“preservative”, “inseam”) were difficult to understand and translate for the youth brokers. While even fluentspeakers of English could have trouble deciphering complex terms, ELL parents depend greatly on these youthbrokers developing search skills. For challenging online information searches, youth had difficulty with queryformation, filtering pertinent information, determining information reliability, and other known problems withsearching and youth (Druin et al., 2009; Foss et al., 2013). While youth relied greatly on social networks for searchhelp for searches, none of the youth brokers in this study mentioned local and community resources, such schools,libraries, and community organizations, that could support their efforts. For instance, Fernando recalled that heneeded to find information on a particular medicine for this mother: “Well, my mom told me to search it [Remicade,a drug] up in the computer ‘cause that’s the injection that they’re gonna, that they’re telling her that she shouldhave. But like, she doesn’t know if she should, ‘cause they said that [the drug] might give her cancer.” To findmore information, Fernando searched using the query, “Remicade effects on the immune system.” When heexamined the search results, Fernando went directly to Google Scholar™, thinking the scholarly information therewould be more reliable. He arrived at an esoteric scientific journal as the first result on the page. Although hebelieved that the information was reliable, he did not understand the information or was able to translate it.Fernando’s example is a case in which a librarian, teacher, or community member could be helpful and scaffoldthe search process. However, the sensitivity of the information and limited community can amplify the difficultyof youth online brokering and learning.We would be regretful to only highlight the challenges to learning in brokering. On the contrary, underpressure and constraints, youth brokers came up with creative strategies to help synthesize and convey theirknowledge. Funds of knowledge (e.g., Moje et al., 2004) are the everyday diverse learning experience that youthrely on. Here, joint media engagement around the technology, search tasks, and translation push children to comeup with creative ways to convey complex information. One set of strategies involved using gestures. For instance,during the search task, Amanda described using hand gestures to describe the information she was explaining.Jennifer called what she was doing, using “charades” to demonstrate the importance of the online information shefound. Other children drew pictures. Bella noted the difficulty in explaining what “preservatives” in food wereand needed to draw out pictures of this concept. Finally, some children used physical objects to help their familiesout in online search. Marina, when she found a recipe online, translated the ingredients to her mother by findingand gathering the physical ingredients that were available. In order to describe what an “inseam” was for a schooluniform website, Amanda needed to get a real pair of pants from the closet to show her mother. In these example,we find that even though online brokering occurs in the digital space, learning and communicating digitalinformation is embedded in physical spaces and is context-based (Lave & Wenger, 1991).The affordances and limitations of digital technologies in brokering and learningICTs for online brokering gives many affordances for learning. The youth brokers in this study all indicated theyhad access to wireless Internet at home and multiple ICTs (e.g., desktops, laptops, smartphones, tablets, etc.). Inthis study, youth brokering occurred mostly in the home space, where privacy, comfort, and access occur together.In the home space, ELL parents and their children can come together to search together, particularly around largerscreens (i.e., desktops, laptops) and can engage in joint media engagement towards problem solving. Youthbrokers also had access to online consumer machine translation tools (i.e., Google Translate) and onlinedictionaries (i.e., Dictionary.com). This helped learners to access the Spanish language for quick translations andunderstandings.However, access to technologies for brokering also have their limitations for learning. First, even thoughall ten online brokers indicated they have wireless Internet at home, digital technologies do not directly teachdigital literacy skills. Youth brokers in this study expressed being overwhelmed by the online information theyencountered. Learning about online technologies and digital literacy is still a social process. While the largerscreens helped to being the families together, youth brokers complained that dealing with their parents’ frequentrequests and pressure was not necessarily a positive attribute for online brokering. For instance, Bella describedthat she and her mother could be at the computer for an hour going from site to site: “We end up in stupid placesbecause she wants to keep branching out somewhere.” The user interface design of the technologies also did notsupport information accessibility for the youth brokers. For example, we noted that Google Translate™ andDictionary.com™ do not use visual representations as a way to support understanding of the text, which can makemultimedia learning more challenging (Mayer & Moreno, 2002). Finally, the youth in this study expressed fearsand concerns about technology breaking. They explained about the anxiousness over computer viruses and explicitpopup ads. These fears have been documented extensively in lower-socioeconomic Latino families (Katz &Gonzalez, 2015), and often prevent families from trusting their children to access online information. For instance,Fernando described explicit popups as making online brokering more difficult, especially when his parents areICLS 2016 Proceedings367© ISLSsitting with him: “And I didn't click that [explicit pop-up ad] and it just gets me mad. And then they [parents] just,then they get mad. And they sometimes just take the computer away. It's not my fault when the ad appears.”Discussion and conclusionVygotsky (1978) theorized that through social play, children and youth learn to develop higher order skill setsbeyond their individual capabilities. Digital media scholars argue for the need to pay more attention to youth’spersonal interests and play in order to understand more about how youth are learning (e.g., Ito et al., 2012; Jenkins,Clinton, Purushotma, Robinson, & Weigel, 2006). Scholars are also examining more closely the role of parentsin co-learning with children through play and digital technologies (e.g., Barron et al., 2009; Takeuchi & Stevens,2011). This exploratory study demonstrates that digital technology also contributes to youth learning throughsupporting family needs. New ICTs allow digital collaborations and learning between adults and children tobecome more two-way, child-centered, and less hierarchical (Clark, 2011). In the case of youth online brokering,joint media engagement is less about parents learning about their children’s digital interests, and more about howELL families can thrive in the face of contextual, linguistic, and cultural constraints. Youth participants in thisstudy indicated close interactions with their parents through various technologies. They reported their parents satdown with their children to access information for their family’s wellbeing. While these interactions can befrustrating, they are opportunities for youth to interact with their parents more directly. Youth are also co-learningin this process. In the face of hardships, youth online brokers must become creative to adapt to the situation. Theyneeded to rely on their social networks, find non-digital solutions to communication issues (e.g., using gestures,developing analogies, drawing pictures, finding physical objects), and quickly synthesize and translate complexinformation (for which they may not fully understand) into their parents’ language. Youth brokers in this studywere motivated to demonstrate what they could accomplish for their ELL families. For instance, Betty emphasizedin the group interview that she was motivated to show off her abilities in search and translation, especially whenher parents did not think she knew Spanish well enough.In conclusion, the findings of this exploratory study highlight the need to examine brokering and familyresponsibilities in the context of digital literacy and connected learning. Our findings suggest that as moreinformation (both urgent and non-urgent) is digitized and accessible online, youth brokers will face a flood ofcomplex information decisions (e.g., query formation, information reliability) that will require deeper learningand connections to different domains. Online brokering and learning is not just about the learning dyad betweenthe ELL parent and youth broker. We believe schools, libraries, community organizations, and other localinstitutions need to partner together with families to support digital literacy help connect learning practices inyouth. For instance, youth brokers search for health issues for their ELL family could be augmented with sciencelearning from schools, digital literacy skills from libraries, and local community supports. We believe that youthbrokering process will be become more dependent on the integration and fluency of cultural, linguistic, and digitalliteracy skillsets. As such, access to technology for brokering online is not enough. This study advocates for aview of technology for meaningful connectivity for learning. While all the youths in this study had access totechnologies for online brokering, our findings suggest a need for a closer examination beyond a simplistic viewof the digital divide. Meaningful connections emphasize both the access to the technologies and the support forengagement to develop skills for learning (Katz & Gonzalez, 2015). We recommend future studies examine thelearning experiences of online youth brokers and their ELL families in the contexts of their homes and domesticsettings over a period of time.ReferencesBaker, S. E., & Edwards, R. (2012). How many qualitative interviews is enough: Expert voices and early careerreflections on sampling and cases in qualitative research. National Centre for Research Methods.Retrieved from http://eprints.ncrm.ac.uk/2273Barron, B., Martin, C. K., Takeuchi, L., & Fithian, R. (2009). Parents as learning partners in the development oftechnological fluency. Retrieved from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/ijlm.2009.0021Bilal, D. (2002). Children’s use of the Yahooligans! Web search engine. III. Cognitive and physical behaviors onfully self-generated search tasks. Journal of the American Society for Information Science andTechnology, 53(13), 1170–1183.Buriel, R., Perez, W., Terri, L., Chavez, D. V., & Moran, V. R. (1998). The relationship of language brokering toacademic performance, biculturalism, and self-efficacy among Latino adolescents. Hispanic Journal ofBehavioral Sciences, 20(3), 283–297.Clark, L. S. (2011). Parental mediation theory for the digital age. Communication Theory, 21(4), 323–343.ICLS 2016 Proceedings368© ISLSDorner, L. M., Orellana, M. F., & Li-Grining, C. P. (2007). “I helped my mom,” and it helped me: Translating theskills of language brokers into improved standardized test scores. American Journal of Education,113(3), 451–478.Druin, A., Foss, E., Hatley, L., Golub, E., Guha, M. L., Fails, J., & Hutchinson, H. (2009). How children searchthe internet with keyword interfaces (pp. 89–96). Proceedings of SIGCHI. ACM.Eisenberg, M. B. (2010). Information literacy: Essential skills for the information age. Journal of Library &Information Technology, 28(2), 39–47.Eksner, H. J., & Orellana, M. F. (2012). Shifting in the Zone: Latina/o child language brokers and the coconstruction of knowledge. Ethos, 40(2), 196–220.Foss, E., Druin, A., Yip, J., Ford, W., Golub, E., & Hutchinson, H. (2013). Adolescent search roles. Journal ofthe American Society for Information Science and Technology, 64(1), 173–189.Gehner, J. (2010). Libraries, low-income people, and social exclusion. Public Library Quarterly, 29(1), 39–47.Gross, M. (1999). Imposed queries in the school library media center: A descriptive study. Library & InformationScience Research, 21(4), 501–521.Hall, N., & Sham, S. (2007). Language brokering as young people’s work: Evidence from Chinese adolescents inEngland. Language and Education, 21(1), 16–30.Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, W., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., et al. (2012). Connected learning: Anagenda for research and design. Chicago, IL, USA: MacArthur Foundation,Jenkins, H., Clinton, K., Purushotma, R., Robinson, A., & Weigel, M. (2006). Confronting the challenges ofparticipatory culture: Media education for the 21st century. Chicago, IL, USA: MacArthur Foundation.Katz, V. (2014). Children as brokers of their immigrant families’ health-care connections. Social Problems, 61(2),194–215.Katz, V. (2014). Kids in the middle: How children of immigrants negotiate community interactions for theirfamilies. Rutgers University Press.Katz, V. S., & Gonzalez, C. (2015). Community variations in low-income Latino families’ technology adoptionand integration. American Behavioral Scientist, 0002764215601712.Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, England:Cambridge University Press.Mayer, R. E., & Moreno, R. (2002). Aids to computer-based multimedia learning. Learning and Instruction, 12(1),107–119.Merriam, S. B. (2009). Qualitative research: A guide to design and implementation. San Francisco, CA: JohnWiley and Sons.Moje, E. B., Ciechanowski, K. M. I., Kramer, K., Ellis, L., Carrillo, R., & Collazo, T. (2004). Working towardthird space in content area literacy: An examination of everyday funds of knowledge and discourse.Reading Research Quarterly, 39(1), 38–70.Orellana, M. F. (2001). The work kids do: Mexican and Central American immigrant children’s contributions tohouseholds and schools in California. Harvard Educational Review, 71(3), 366–390.Pandya, C., Batalova, J., & McHugh, M. (2011). Limited English proficient individuals in the United States:Number, share, growth, and linguistic diversity. Washington, D.C.: Migration Policy Institute.Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. (2007). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developinggrounded theory, 3rd ed. SAGE Publications.Takeuchi, L., & Stevens, R. (2011). The new coviewing: Designing for learning through joint media engagement.TheJoanGanzCooneyCenteratSesameWorkshop.Retrievedfromhttp://www.joanganzcooneycenter.org/Reports-asc.htmlThompson, R.W. (1992). Spanish as a pluricentric language. In M.G. Clyne and W. de Gruyter (eds.). Pluricentriclanguages: Differing norms in different nations (pp. 45–70).US Census Bureau. (2012). The 2012 statistical abstract - U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved February 6, 2015, fromhttp://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes.AcknowledgmentsWe want to thank Michael Levine and Lori Takeuchi at the Joan Ganz Cooney Center for supporting this work.We thank Rocio Almanza and Alexia Raynal for volunteering on this project. We thank the youth, teachers, andstaff at the local school that participated in this study. This study is a part of the Families and Media Project andsupported by funding from the Heising Simons Foundation and the Bezos Family Foundation.ICLS 2016 Proceedings369© ISLS