Designing for Effective Collaborative Learning in High-Needs RuralClassroomsLana M. Minshew, Sharon Derry, Janice Anderson, and Kelly Barber-Lesterminshew@live.unc.edu, derry@emal.unc.edu, anderjl@email.unc.edu, kelba@live.unc.eduUniversity of North Carolina at Chapel HillAbstract: Orchestrating collaborative meaning making in classrooms can present a significantchallenge to teachers, in particular, for teachers in under-resourced middle schools in rural areas.This paper reports on issues that arose during a prototype implementation of a biologycurriculum for middle school students, which resulted the design of collaborative scriptssupported by technology that aid teachers in advancing student thinking.Keywords: collaboration, technology, classroom orchestration, macro- & micro-scriptingIntroductionThe context of our research is Biosphere, a federally funded Design-Based Research (DBR) project that is acollaborative effort between the University of Wisconsin at Madison and the University of North Carolina atChapel Hill. We are developing an inquiry biology curriculum that focuses on local sustainability issues and issuitable for under-resourced middle schools in rural areas within the United States. Our work is grounded infoundational research on collaborative meaning making, which has shown that technology-mediated building andsharing of collaborative knowledge advances both group and individual development (Scardamalia & Bereiter,2014). However, productive technology-infused collaborative learning environments cannot happen withoutproper design and support (Kaendler, et al., 2014; King, 1997).Orchestrating collaborative meaning making in classrooms can present a significant challenge for eventhe most experienced teachers. Orchestration of collaborative learning in classrooms has been conceptualized interms of macro-scripts and micro-scripts (Kaendler et al., 2014; King, 1997). Macro-scripts are specific activityplans for teachers and students, designed in accordance with research and theory, which help ensure productivecollaborative interactions (Kaendler et al., 2014). Micro-scripts, in contrast, are small repeatable routines thatrepresent possible just-in-time principled pedagogical interventions that a teacher can use in situations wherestudents need additional guidance for collaborative learning. Kaendler et al. (2014) examined the nature ofeffective macro- and micro-scripting in classroom settings and conceptualized the teacher competencies necessaryfor effective collaborative learning as including these scripting skills.The Kaendler et al. model, while providing useful inspiration for our work, assumes developing highlevels of teacher competence and significant planning and reflection time for implementation. These requirementsare not easily met at our research site, a rural, under-resourced middle school. As is typical in many underresourced schools, our site school has rates of teacher turnover and levels of uncertified or under certified teachingstaff. Therefore, our challenge is to shift the major scripting demands put forth in the work of Kaendler et al.(2014) away from teachers and onto the curriculum itself, thus reducing the teachers’ “orchestration load”(Dillenbourg, 2013). The design solutions we are exploring necessarily rely on technologies that are accessible,affordable, and usable to help even underprepared teachers orchestrate technology-mediated collaborativelearning and teaching in high-needs rural schools. This is a substantial challenge and the theoretical contributionsof our work pertain to adapting previous work on scripting and orchestration of collaborative learning for highneeds contexts.Theoretical frameworkCollaborative script theory provides a useful framework for the evaluation and design of collaborative learningenvironments (Fischer et al., 2013; Kaendler et al., 2014). Fischer and colleagues propose seven principles of theirscript theory. For example, the sixth principle based in Vygotsky’s (1978) zone of proximal development statesthat external scripts can allow learners to engage in collaborative learning at a level beyond what they are able tosuccessfully accomplish on their own in the beginning of a collaborative process. External collaborative scriptsare gradually faded to foster development of student internal collaborative scripts (Fischer et al., 2013).Knowledge Building as conceptualized by Scardamalia & Bereiter (2014) provides additional theoreticalinspiration for conceptualizing our technology-based design solutions in which small group knowledge isdisseminated among the class using a platform conducive of open sharing of content information. This theoryICLS 2016 Proceedings978© ISLSdisseminated among the class using a platform conducive of open sharing of content information. This theoryargues that technology-mediated building and sharing of collaborative knowledge advances both group andindividual development (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014).MethodsOur over-arching method was Design Based Research (DBR), an iterative process that incorporates cycles of datacollection, analysis and reflection to inform design of educational innovations and develop theory (McKenney &Reeves, 2012; Easterday et al., 2014). The Easterday et al. model has six iterative phases: Focus, Understand,Define, Conceive, Build, and Test. The research reported here is based on data obtained from implementing aprototype of Unit 1 in the Biosphere curriculum, which will have three units. In Unit 1 students design acomposting bioreactor to anchor science inquiry. Although we followed all the six stages of DBR within thisprototype study, this study was our first experience with the school and population and thus represented the earlyFocus through Conceive phases in relation to the larger, multi-year DBR project. This prototype study informeddesign of the version of Unit 1 now being implemented in classrooms. The study also served as a baseline sincethe curriculum at this stage provided minimal scripting and orchestration, allowing us to judge baselinecapabilities of teachers and students.Data were collected during Biosphere Institute (BI), an 8-day after school program with two follow-upsummer sessions. The participating school was a STEM middle school in a rural and economically disadvantagedcounty in the Southeast staffed largely by teachers with alternative training such as Teach for America. The schoolpurports to focus on project-based learning and the principal believed that teachers and students were experiencedwith collaborative learning. Student volunteers were solicited through letters sent to parents by the principal.Eighteen students agreed to participate. Participants were racially diverse and included students from grades 6-8.The BI took place mostly in a large science classroom. During seatwork students were grouped by gradelevel (6-8) around rectangular tables, although projects took them into other parts of the school grounds. Each daystudents engaged in a collaborative task with their small groups, but recorded reflections and results on personaliPads that contained curriculum materials, which prompted students to answer specific questions about theirinquiries. Examples of small group inquiry activities in Unit 1 of the Biosphere curriculum include collectingevidence about the school environment, conducting inquiries into how much trash the school creates, designing acomposting bioreactor, and creating a composting plan for the school. The learning goals include development ofcomplex biology knowledge related to energy cycles.The primary analytic method was video recording and analysis following guidelines for video researchin the learning sciences (Derry et al., 2010). Each student group was video recorded with a researcher taking fieldnotes. A camera in the corner of the room recorded whole class activities and the instructor.Data from the 6th and 8th grade groups were analyzed to afford contrasting cases of how the curriculumworked at two different developmental levels. Two researchers repeatedly reviewed the 6th and 8th grade videos.From these viewings researchers compiled 90 minutes of clip samples that ranged from 10-15 minutes in lengthand enabled study of group behaviors during collaborative tasks. These selections were transcribed and examinedin depth through a process that involved repeated interaction analysis of discourse (IA; Jordan and Henderson,1995) by the authors. Recordings of the IA sessions and session notes were analyzed in accordance withconversation analysis conventions with no coding applied.Summary of main findingsVideo analyses of the prototype implementation uncovered numerous problems we could address with improvedmacro- and micro-scripting. The issues students experienced in small group learning included:Frequent off-task behavior and argument digressions.Failure to transfer individual ideas expressed on iPads to group collaborative thinking.Focus on individual technology that hindered group collaboration.Extensive overlapping talk and significant difficulty sharing and exchanging ideas in ways that includedall voices.• Focus on task completion at the expense of deep thinking.• Failure to utilize argumentation scripts for target content, despite evidence of internal argumentationscripts.Concurrently, we observed that teachers experienced the following in orchestrating and facilitating studentgroups:•••••Missed opportunities for supporting and interrogating student thinking.ICLS 2016 Proceedings979© ISLS••••Inability to scaffold student argumentation with science content.Failure to recognize all students’ contributions.Focus on affective engagement rather than student thinking.Sub-optimal orchestration of classroom technology infrastructure.Design of macro- and micro-scripting supportBased on the prototype study the design solution addressing these issues has four components: Macro-script forstudents, macro-scripts for teachers, micro-scripts for teachers, and technology support for collaborativeorchestration.Student macro-scriptTo assist students with group collaboration a Think, Collaborate, Share (TCS) script was designed into thecurriculum materials and teacher guides to provide students with individual thinking time, time to share their ideaswith their small group, and then an opportunity to discuss with the whole class. Additionally, collaborative rolessuch as Scribe, Speaker, and Task Minder were incorporated into curriculum and teacher materials.Teacher macro-scriptTeachers will be trained and curriculum materials will be structured to support the 3R orchestration cycle, a macroscript based on Fong et al.’s (2015) observations of experienced teachers orchestrating collaborative learning. The3R orchestration cycle consists of teachers regularly calling a whole-class plenary session to Reflect (pause groupwork to study and evaluate what is going on), Refocus (redirecting work if necessary), and finally Release (returnstudents to working collaboratively in groups). Teachers will enact the cycle multiple times during collaborativegroup work, using the technology system described below, to help them gain insight into and ability to interrogateand push student thinking.Technology support for collaborative orchestrationThe 3R cycle will be facilitated by technology through the use of Linoboard, a free collaborative tool whereteachers can create space for students to share ideas. The Linoboard interface will be on the small group iPads aswell as projected onto a screen that will facilitate whole class discussion. After students collaborate in their smallgroup, the Scribe in each group will be responsible for constructing the group’s note on the Linoboard platform.Once submitted, the note is shared with the whole class thus offering a space for knowledge distribution on theclass level. Students can view all submissions via their iPad or the projection on the larger class screen. Theteacher can use this technology feature to highlight group ideas and have the Sharer respond and Reflect upon thework that has been completed. The Linoboard interface provides teachers a platform to Refocus student thinkingbefore Releasing them to edit and refine their thinking. Once released students will use the Linoboard feature thatallows them edit their previously made note to incorporate new ideas from the Reflect phase of the 3R cycle. Thecollaborative space also serves as a platform for teachers to view all group work and indicates which groups needmicro-scripting for further refinement of ideas.Teacher micro-scriptsTeachers will be trained when and how to use several micro-scripts designed to address specific student issuesobserved in our study. Curricular materials designed for the teacher will provide suggestions and reminders forwhen they should be used. An example of one micro-script is re-voicing (Alozie, Moje, & Krajcik, 2010), whichcan be implemented during the Reflect phase of the 3R cycle. Re-voicing is a technique for facilitatingcollaboration by reflecting back and restating the contributions of students in order to clarify and draw attentionto specific ideas. The teacher can use re-voicing to highlight student contributions and to aid in Refocusing theclass or individual groups. Other micro-scripts will require teachers to be vigilant for certain thinking issues, suchas evidence of common misconceptions related to understanding ecosystems and energy cycles or for evidence ofargument digressions. Materials and training will supply micro-scripts for particular problems that are expectedto occur.Concluding comments and next stepsThe problem we address is how to orchestrate effective collaborative science learning in under-resourced ruralschools characterized by high-needs students, high teacher turnover, and a high percentage of under-preparedteachers. We make use of theories and research on collaborative learning from The Learning Sciences to createeducative curriculum materials designed to support orchestration of effective collaborative learning through theICLS 2016 Proceedings980© ISLScoordinated use of macro-scripts for students, macro-scripts and micro-scripts for teachers, and supportivecollaborative technologies for students and teachers. Our design challenge is to discover ways to embed thesewithin student and teacher curricular materials so that, as a coordinated system, they will function effectively asscaffolding that might be faded over time, building on and enhancing both the collaborative scripts of students,and the orchestration capabilities of teachers. An added dimension of our challenge is our choice to rely ontechnologies, that are accessible, affordable and usable. An example is the sharing platform, Linoboard, which isfree, web-based, and allows many different devices to use it simultaneously to create a seamless, collaborative,knowledge building-learning environment. Important research questions for our work include understanding theextent to which effective collaborative knowledge building can be supported and acquired through curriculardesign inspired by research and theories from The Learning Sciences but that does not depend on long-termdevelopment of skilled teachers. We also seek to understand how these theories must be modified in service tothis population. Our next curricular implementation that includes design changes described in this contributionwill help shed light on these questions as we examine the evidence on whether our designs have the intendedimpacts on students’ and teachers’ collaborative knowledge building processes.ReferencesAlozie, N. M., Moje, E. B., & Krajcik, J. S. (2010). An analysis of the supports and constraints for scientificdiscussion in high school project-based science. Science Education, 94(3), 395-427. doi:10.1002/sce.20365Derry, S. J., Pea, R. D., Barron, B., Engle, R. A., Erickson, F., Goldman, R., Hall, R., Koschmann, Lemke, J. L.,Sherin, M. G., & Sherin, B. L. (2010). Conducting video research in the learning sciences: Guidance onselection, analysis, technology, and ethics. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19, 3-53.Dillenbourg, P. (2013). Design for classroom orchestration. Computers & Education, 69, 485-492.Easterday, M., Rees Lewis, D. & Gerber, E. (2014). Design-based research process: Problems, phases, andapplications. In Proceedings of the International Conference of Learning Sciences, June 23-27, 2014,Colorado, USA (pp. 317-324).Fischer, F., Kollar, I., Stegmann, K., & Wecker, C., (2013). Toward a script theory of guidance in computersupported collaborative learning. Educational Psychologist, 48(1), 56-66.Fong, C., Cober, R. M., Messina, R., Moher, T., Murray, J., Peebles, B., & Slotta, J. D. (2015). The 3Rorchestration cycle: Fostering multi-modal inquiry discourse in a scaffolded inquiry environment. InProceedings from the Annual meeting Computer Supportive Collaborative Learning Conferenece.Jordan, B. & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 4(1), 39-103.Kaendler, C., Wiedmann, M., Rummel, N., Spada, H., (2014). Teacher competencies for the implementation ofcollaborative learning in the classroom: a Framework and research review. Educational PsychologicalReview, 1-32.McKenny, S. & Reeves, T. C. (2012). Conducting educational design research. New York, NY: Routeledge.Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, pedagogy, andtechnology. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences. New York, NY:Cambridge University Press.Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Havard University Press.AcknowledgementsThis material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. DRL1418044.Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authorsand do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.ICLS 2016 Proceedings981© ISLS