Examining the Impacts of Annotation and Automated Guidance onEssay Revision and Science LearningLibby Gerard, University of California, Berkeley, libby.gerard@gmail.comMarcia C. Linn, University of California, Berkeley, mclinn@berkeley.eduJacquie Madhok, University of California, Berkeley, jjmadhok@gmail.comAbstract: Automated guidance can facilitate student revision of explanations and arguments inonline inquiry science units. We explore ways to design guidance for short essays that promotesmeaningful revision rather than superficial changes. Specifically, we compare the affordancesof annotation of a fictional essay to knowledge integration guidance on revision of sciencewriting. 293 middle-school students were randomly assigned to condition. Students whoannotated an essay made significantly greater pre to post test gains and were also better able touse automated guidance on a posttest item than students who only received knowledgeintegration guidance. These findings suggest ways to support students to revise science writingand build integrated understanding of science.Keywords: technology, revision, writing, student learning, science, knowledge integration“I like when there is writing because with typing it feels like I can explain more insteadof…just doing multiple choice, because then its kind of like I want to explain it really bad butyou can only put an answer.” (7th grade study participant)IntroductionWriting in science gives students the opportunity to defend claims and integrate multiple pieces of evidencegathered from a variety of contexts. A substantive literature demonstrates the value of writing and revisingactivities that prompt students to build connections between their initial ideas and new ideas (Fitzgerald, 1987).The centrality of writing and revision in scientific practice are reflected by the Next Generation Science Standards.Students are expected to construct explanations and arguments, and, to “identify flaws in their own arguments andmodify and improve them in response to criticism” (NGSS, 2013). Writing and revision of arguments is integralto long-term science learning (Rivard, 1994). In spite of the importance of writing and revision, these activitiesare rare in the science classroom. This is due largely to the time required of teachers to provide individualizedfeedback for often at least 150 students. A NAEP report found that about half of Grade 11 students (52%) hadnever completed a written report of any kind in science (Mullis & Jenkins, 1988).Advanced natural language processing tools can help science teachers integrate writing and revisionactivities by automatically scoring student written short essays about an inquiry topic. Individualized guidancecan be assigned immediately based on the score to help students revise their essays (Liu et al, 2014; Roscoe &McNamara, 2012). Some essay writing tools (e.g. Criterion) that give diagnostic feedback on essay mechanicsand organization have been widely deployed in classrooms to increase writing and revision opportunities. Weexplore ways to design guidance that strengthens the argument in the essay.Students generally find revision in science unfamiliar and challenging. We characterize revision asinvolving revisiting or gathering new evidence, comparing initial ideas with new ideas, and reformulatingconnections. Class norms typically support completeness and correctness rather than refinement. In analyses ofclassroom argumentation Berland & Reiser (2011) found students rarely revised their ideas in light of challengesor questions posed. Studies consistently find that students most often make mechanical revisions to their essayswhen given feedback, rather than substantive changes to the content as suggested (Roscoe & McNamara, 2012).Less competent writers tend to make changes to spelling and grammar rather than to revise for meaning(Fitzgerald, 1987). This is particularly problematic for science because most pre-college students are novicescience writers and have limited understanding of what makes a good science explanation (Sato & Linn, 2014).Our prior work suggests that individualized, automated guidance for students’ short essays can strengthenstudents’ revisions and science learning when designed to promote knowledge integration (Linn & Eylon, 2011).Guidance designed according to the knowledge integration perspective prompts students to distinguish betweentheir own scientific ideas and new ideas introduced in instruction. The knowledge integration guidance led tosignificantly more productive essay revisions, and subsequently more coherent and accurate science essays thandid generic guidance (e.g. “add more evidence) or specific guidance (e.g. “Incorrect. Energy transforms from lightenergy into chemical energy) (Author et al., 2015).ICLS 2016 Proceedings394© ISLSAnalyses also revealed difficulties students faced in integrating ideas during the essay revision process.Only a small percentage of the students integrated a new idea into their essay meaning that they edited their initialessay when revising to build a connection between their initial ideas and the new information they added. Ratherthe majority of students added a new idea without connecting it to their initial response; the new idea was “tackedon”. On a post test taken a week after the writing and revision activities, the students who had made integratedrevisions demonstrated a significantly deeper understanding of the science concepts than those students who hadadded new but disconnected ideas in their revision (Gerard & Linn, 2015). This suggests that the practice ofrevision, when done in a way that builds and refines connections among ideas, can set in motion a successfullearning strategy for the rest of the unit.In this study, we explore ways to help students learn to revise essays by integrating new ideas. Wedesigned an essay annotation activity to help students learn how to use guidance to revise science writing. In theannotator activity, students identify gaps in a fictional student’s essay and place pre-determined labels on the essayas hints for revision (Figure 1). The hints call for the fictional student to edit her essay to connect new ideas. Wecompare students’ use of annotation and then automated guidance to revise short essays in an inquiry unit, tostudents’ use of multiple rounds of automated guidance to revise their short essays.MethodsThis instructional comparison study investigates two approaches to guiding students essay revision and examinestheir impacts on science learning. Specifically, we compare the affordances of annotation of a fictional essayversus additional practice with automated guidance on revision of science writing.ParticipantsTwo-hundred and ninety-three students in three teachers’ classrooms in one public middle school were randomlyassigned within class periods to either the Annotation + revision condition, or, Two revisions condition. Theschool serves a moderately diverse student population (47% of students are an ethnicity other than Caucasian;26% receive a free or reduced price lunch). Students worked in pairs in the unit and completed the pretest andposttest individually.Curriculum and embedded assessmentsWe used the Web-based Inquiry Science Environment (WISE, http://wise.berkeley.edu) to randomly assignconditions to students within classes. Students studied the WISE Photosynthesis and Cell Respiration unit, whichguides students to investigate energy flow in plants and animals. The unit incorporates dynamic visualizations andgenerative activities, including writing short essays, to help students gather evidence and integrate ideas. Studentsstudied the WISE unit, led by their regular classroom teacher, for 6-8 class periods (50 minutes each) spread over2 weeks.We selected three short essays in the unit for annotation, guidance and revision. The selected essays callfor students to integrate multiple pieces of evidence from the unit to explain energy transfer and transformation.Our analysis focuses on one of the three essays, called GreenRoof (Figure 1):GreenRoof: Mary heard that growing plants on a roof could lower a house’s energy usage. Marydoes not understand why and how plants could help. Write an energy story to explain to Mary whathappens to energy from the sun in the picture? How could growing plants on the roof reduce thehouse’s energy usage?Each of the short essays included automated scoring by c-raterML™, a natural language processing tool developedby the Educational Testing Service (see Liu et al, 2014 for model development info). WISE assigned personalizedguidance for the student’s essay immediately based on the automated, craterML score (Table 1).Essay revisionFor each of the three short essay steps students received personalized, automated guidance (Table 1). To assessthe value of the annotation activity the two conditions were:1. Annotation+revision: students first annotate the response of a fictitious student, then they getpersonalized automated guidance on their own response.2. Two revisions: students get two rounds of personalized, automated guidance on their own response. Weconstrained the algorithm to assign unique guidance to the second revision even if the score did notchange.ICLS 2016 Proceedings395© ISLSIn the Annotation+revision condition, students were prompted to write their short essay, and then toannotate Mary’s essay using pre-defined labels. Mary’s essays included vague ideas as well as a mix of normativeand non-normative ideas (Figure 1). The pre-defined annotation labels included questions about energy flow thatwere general enough to be used across all three short essays: (a) Where does energy come from? (b) How doesenergy change – what is the process? (c) How does the energy move? (d) Why are plants important – what wouldhappen with no plants? (Figure 1). We used the same labels on each essay to model for students the questions theycould ask themselves when they wrote and revised future essays. After annotating Mary’s essay, students wereprompted to submit their own essay for one round of automated guidance and revision.Annotation activityGreenRoof essay and auto guidanceFigure 1. Revision activities.In the Two revisions condition, students were prompted to write their short essay (Figure 1). They were then giventwo chances to submit their essay for automated guidance and to revise. All guidance was designed to help studentsmove up one level in the knowledge integration rubric (Table 1).Table 1: GreenRoof knowledge integration scoring rubric and personalized, automated guidanceScore, CriteriaStudent Essay ExamplesAutomated Guidance Round 11 Off TaskIDK{Student name}, think about the Sun’s rays.Where do they go? How do they move?Check out Step 2.1 for a hint. Then, rewriteyour story below.2 IncompleteScientificallynonnormative OR irrelevantOR repeats the questionIt helps reduce energy usage because you canget energy that you can use for your housethrough the plants.{Student name}, expand your story. Howdoes the energy change inside thechloroplast? Check out Step 3.2 for a hint.Then, revise your story below.3 PartialPartial link of key ideasOR normative and nonnormative ideas linkedThe sun gives light energy to the plants sothey can photosynthisize and the plant giveoff oxygen and energy to the world.{Student name}, explain the connectionsbetween your ideas. How does the planttransform light energy to energy it can use?Check out Step 2.11 for a hint. Then, reviseyour story below.4 Full1 full link [ok if responsealso has non-normativeideas, as long as notconnected to link]One day Brent and Emilio … …observed thegreen roof. They noticed the sun's lightenergy was being absorbed by the plants onthe roof.…They thought the plant turned thelight energy to chemical energy.{Student name}, good progress. Now expandyour story. Why are the plants important what would happen to sunlight that hits theside of the roof with NO plants? Check outStep 1.4 for a hint. Then, revise your storybelow.ICLS 2016 Proceedings396© ISLSStep 1.4 for a hint. Then, revise your storybelow.5 Complex2 or more full linksPlants can lower energy usage when there ona roof because they absorb the sun and turnthat energy into chemical energy. Withoutthe plants on the roof it get hot since sunlightenergy will turn into heat{Student name}, great reasoning. Now,check over your story to make sure itdescribes the energy flow from the sun toboth sides of the roof. Revise as needed.Data sourcesWe used a pretest, embedded assessments, and a posttest to capture student science learning and student ability touse guidance to revise. The pretest was taken one day prior to starting the unit. The posttest was takenapproximately three days after completing the unit and one week after the last essay revision activity. The pre/posttest included two short essays, Tadpole and Rabbit [Table 2].To assess student ability to use automated guidance, for the Tadpole essay, students received one roundof personalized, automated guidance and revised their response. The two essay activities were the same on thepretest and posttest.We conducted student interviews and classroom observations to gather further information on howstudents used the writing and revision tools, and student views on writing and revision in science in general.Table 2: Pre/Post Test Short EssaysTadpole*RabbitExplain how the tadpole in the picture gets and uses energy togrow.After you are done writing, press “Check Answer”. You willhave 1 chance to get feedback and revise your story.There is a rabbit in the classroom. Mary wonders how the rabbitgets and uses energy from the sun.Write a story using scientific evidence to explain to Mary howthe rabbit gets and uses energy from the sun.* Students received one round of personalized, automated guidance and were prompted to revise.Data analysisWe scored students’ embedded and pre/post test responses for scientific accuracy and coherence using knowledgeintegration rubrics (see Table 1). The rubric rewarded students for making links among ideas (Liu, Lee & Linn,2011). We scored students’ initial and revised essays on the embedded items, and students initial and revisedessays on the Tadpole pretest and posttest item. Two researchers blind coded all of the student essays. Researchersreached 97% agreement and worked out the disagreements until coming to a consensus.In addition to scoring the data with knowledge integration rubrics, we also coded the students’ embeddedessays for the kind of revisions they made based on the automated guidance. We compared their initial essay totheir revised essay and categorized the type of writing change (see Table 3). In this analysis, we coded the changesin the students’ science writing not the scientific accuracy of the change.Table 3: Revision RubricScore3Category/DescriptionIntegrated: Incorporated an idea intothe middle of the essay. Edited theinitial essay to formulate the connectionto the new ideas.ICLS 2016 ProceedingsExampleInitial EssayRevised EssayThe plants on the roof willtake the energy to createphotosynthesis and grow.Since the plants are on top ofthe roof it is closer to the suntaking energy from thehouse.The plants on the roof will take theenergy to create photosynthesis andgrow. The plant uses carbon dioxidefro which we breathe out, water, andlight energy to create glucose. Sincethe plants are on top of the roof it iscloser to the sun taking energy fromthe house.397© ISLS2Added Different: Added a new idea toend of essay that is different than ideasin initial essay. Does not make anychanges to initial essay. Or, deletedinitial essay and wrote new essay withdifferent ideas.1Added Similar: Added a new idea tothe end of the essay that expanded withmore details, or repeated in differentwords, the ideas in the initial essay.Does not change initial essay.0No ChangeThe plant uses the left oversunlight from what the houseleaves behindThe plants soak up theenergy and provide light tothe house. This will make itso that you will not have touse lights during the day.The suns energy goes to the plantsthen, plants absorb the light energy.The energy goes to the house. Theplants change the energy into thechemical energy when it goes throughthe plantsThe plants soak up the energy andprovide light to the house. This willmake it so that you will not use lightsduring the day. Also it will help theenergy bill go down because it is usingsolar energy.FindingsEmbedded assessmentIn both conditions, students used the automated guidance tools to significantly improve their GreenRoof essay.Students assigned to annotation+revision outperformed students assigned to two revisions [N=152 pairs AnnotateM=.46 SD=.72; Auto Guidance Two Rounds M=.28 SD=.56, t(149)=1.72, p=.09]. The difference betweenconditions was significant for students who began the writing activity with mid to high prior knowledge [Gain,High Prior, n=92 pairs, Annotate+revision M=.46 SD =.55; Two revisions M=.18 SD=.39, t(90)=2.9, p<.01]. Wedefined mid/high prior knowledge as students who scored a 3 or above on the knowledge integration rubric ontheir initial GreenRoof essay.Students’ revision approach differed significantly across the annotation+revision and two revisionsconditions [Pearson chi2(3)= 14.11 Pr=.003]; Table 5]. The annotation+revision condition led significantly morestudents to add new and different ideas to their essay when they revised. Alternatively, students who received tworounds of automated guidance were more likely to add ideas that were similar to those they had already written.Further, the annotation condition led substantially more mid/high prior knowledge students to make a revision;88% of high prior knowledge students in the annotation+revision condition compared to 78% of high priorknowledge students in the two revisions condition. Approximately 19% of students in both conditions integrateda new idea into their initial essay. There was no difference between conditions in the percentage of students whomade integrated revisions. Mid/high prior knowledge students were more likely to integrate than low priorknowledge, consistent with the literature on revision (Fitzgerald, 1987).Table 5: Percent of students making each revision type on embedded essay by condition and prior knowledgeAll StudentsTwoAnnotationrevisions+ revisionHigh PriorTwoAnnotationrevisionsrevisionLow PriorTworevisionsAnnotation +revisionNo revision241622122720Added Similar393040373623Added Different183414242746Integrated19202427911+Student interviews and classroom observations suggest that the annotation+revision condition helpedstudents use guidance to critically examine their own essay. As one student reported, “I think that the Mary’s story[annotate activity]…helps you change yours [essay] because you take the feedback you are giving Mary and thenyou kind of apply it to your own.” Students used the prompts that were repeated in annotation labels (e.g. howdoes energy change?) as they reflected on how to revise their essay. Another student reported: “Since you have tomove [the labels] around and see where it goes, it makes you think that if that was you doing the question and theteacher gave you that feedback…it kind of makes you think ‘Oh ya, that should go there’ and then it can help youwhen you have a question similar you can be like oh I remember that and I should add that in mine now.”ICLS 2016 Proceedings398© ISLSPre/post testPre to Post TestGainWe report the results of each pre/post test essay separately since students received automated guidance on theTadpole short essay, and did not receive automated guidance on the Rabbit essay. Students in both conditionssignificantly improved from pretest to posttest [Rabbit t(282)=8.72, p<.0001; Tadpole t(276)=7.78, p<.0001][Figure 2]. There was no difference in gains between the two conditions on the Rabbit essay.On the Tadpole short essay where all students received automated guidance, students in theannotation+revision condition made significantly greater pre to posttest gains than the students in the two revisionscondition, Figure 2 [N=261 students, Annotate+revision M=.58 SD=1.02; Two revisions M=.29 SD=1.03,t(259)=2.29, p<.05].0.8*0.60.4Annotate+Revision0.2Two Revisions0Rabbit n=266Tadpole n=261Figure 2. Student pre to post test gains on two short essays. The tadpole essay included automated, guidance.Further, by posttest the students in the annotate+revision condition took better advantage of theautomated guidance on the Tadpole essay than students in the two revisions condition. The analysis suggests thatthe annotation activity helped students learn how to use guidance to revise their writing and improve the coherenceof their understanding.Students who made an integrated change when revising their GreenRoof essay during the unit, made thegreatest pre to post test gains on both short essays [Figure 3]. This strengthens our earlier findings demonstratingthe benefits of integrating as a revision approach (Author, 2015). Further design work is needed to improve thepercentage of students who integrate when revising.Pre to Post Test Gain10.8No Revision0.6Added Similar0.4Added Different0.2Integrated0TadpoleRabbitFigure 3. Pre to post test gain by type of revision made on an essay embedded in the unit.Example of student revision using annotation and auto guidanceWe selected a case of a student, Erica, whose work was representative of those in the annotate+revision condition.The case documents how Erica used annotation and automated guidance to strengthen her essays.Erica began the Photosynthesis/Cell Respiration project with a mix of ideas about energy transfer andenergy forms. On the pretest Tadpole essay, she explained a tadpole “gets energy straight from the sun. Thetadpoles use the energy to store and create kinetic energy.” This response seems to draw on vocabulary that is notfully understood.Erica gathered new ideas from visualizations of energy flow in photosynthesis. She connected these ideaswith her intuitive views about energy in her initial GreenRoof essay [Figure 4]. She explained that plants getenergy from the sun and give energy to the house. Erica then annotated Mary’s GreenRoof essay placing the labels“where she wanted [Mary’s essay] to explain more”. Next, Erica received automated guidance on her essay. Theguidance helped Erica see that her essay generally needed improvement, but she did not know what to change.Erica drew on her annotation experience to consider what to revise. “It [the annotator] helped me use the[automated] feedback because I could go back and look at those questions [the annotator labels] I had put downand use it for myself.” Erica then revised her GreenRoof essay to add a new idea about photosynthesis, while stillholding onto her non-normative ideas about the transfer of energy from plants to the house.ICLS 2016 Proceedings399© ISLSFigure 4. Erica’s writing, annotation, and revision on the GreenRoof essay.After the GreenRoof essay activity, Erica explored visualizations of energy flow in cellular respiration.She then wrote the EnergySun essay, the last essay writing activity in the unit [Figure 5]. Erica wrote a vagueessay indicating she was still confused about energy transfer. Erica next annotated Mary’s EnergySun essay“placing the labels where it was hard to understand [what Mary wrote] and [she] wanted to know more.” Thesecomments seem to reflect Erica’s growing realization that she needs to find out more about energy transfer andtransformation. Next, Erica received personalized, automated guidance on her essay. The guidance helped Ericaunderstand what she needed to find out whereas at first she said, she “didn’t know what to write.” Erica revisedher essay to integrate detailed links about energy transformation and storage in glucose.Figure 5. Erica’s writing, annotation, and revision on the EnergySun essayBy the time of the posttest, Erica had formulated a coherent account of energy flow. She explained onthe posttest how a tadpole gets and uses energy. “…The sun gives off radiation to the plant which absorbs it intoits chloroplast. The chloroplast transforms it into chemical energy to make glucose which helps it grow. Thetadpoles then eat the plants...” The annotate+revision condition helped Erica learn how to revise a science essay.She drew on the big questions about energy that were in the annotator labels she used to critique Mary’s essay toinform her own writing and revision.Conclusions and implicationsThis study investigated two different approaches to supporting students’ use of automated guidance to revise andstrengthen their science writing and understanding. These results demonstrate that automated knowledgeintegration guidance can help students refine their ideas about energy transfer and transformation inphotosynthesis and cellular respiration. It is noteworthy that both conditions guided students to figure out how torevise their own essays rather than providing them with the answer.In providing students a fictional peer’s essay to annotate, we found that students transferred the hintsthey used to critique a peer’s essay to their reflection on how to apply guidance to improve their own essay.ICLS 2016 Proceedings400© ISLSStudents’ reflective process may explain why students in the annotation+revision condition later showed greatergains on the posttest when revising an essay with automated guidance than those students in the two revisionscondition. The annotation+revision condition helped students learn how to revise using guidance.Students have difficulty revising scientific arguments and often tack ideas on to their essays rather thanintegrating them to increase the coherence of their responses (Gerard & Linn, 2015). We designed the annotationactivities to model the process of editing within an essay, as opposed to only adding ideas to the end. A minorityof students however in both conditions (19%) integrated new ideas when revising essays during the unit. Theannotate condition increased the likelihood that students would add new and different ideas rather than elaborateon their existing ideas. Research shows that when students are asked to add new ideas they integrate their ideasmore effectively than when they are asked to add similar ideas (Matuk & Linn, 2015). The case study reinforcesthese interpretations by showing that the annotate condition helped Erica add key ideas in energy transfer andtransformation.Students’ propensity to add-on ideas, similar or different, rather than integrate new ideas may indicatethe difficulty and the unfamiliarity that integrating ideas presents to students as they learn a new topic. Traditionalschool culture prioritizes adding a “right” idea over distinguishing and building connections among one’s initialviews and the new information presented. This finding also indicates areas for improvement in the annotationtask design. Although the annotation hints (e.g. “how does energy change?”) were intended to prompt the fictionalstudent to both fill gaps in her essay and modify non-normative ideas, our student interviews suggest studentsperceived the hints as guidance suggesting the fictional student add more information about this idea. Futuredesign iterations will aim to focus students’ attention on both adding and modifying during the annotation activity.In all, this study reveals how tools like annotation and automated guidance can help students to engagein meaningful writing and revision practices in the science classroom. Knowledge integration guidance as well asusing annotations to model the process of using guidance can significantly strengthen essay revisions.ReferencesFitzgerald, J., (1987). Research on revision in writing. Review of Educational Research, 57(4), 481-506.Gerard, L., Ryoo, K., McElhaney, K., Liu, L., Rafferty, A., & Linn, M.C. (2015, online first). Automated guidancefor student inquiry. Journal of Educational PsychologyGerard, L., & Linn, M.C. (2015). Writing and revising in science. Paper accepted for the annual meeting of theAmerican Education Research Association, Washington D.CLinn, M. C., & Eylon, B.-S. (2011). Science Learning and Instruction: Taking Advantage of Technology toPromote Knowledge Integration. New York: RoutledgeLiu, O. L., Brew, C., Blackmore, J., Gerard, L. F., Madhok, J., & Linn, M. C. (2014). Automatedscoring of constructed response science Items: Prospects and obstacles. Educational Measurement: Issuesand Practice, 33(2), 19-28Liu, O.L., Lee, H.S., & Linn, M.C. (2011). Measuring knowledge integration: Validation of four-yearassessments. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 48(9), 1079-1107Matuk, C. & Linn, M. C. (2015). Examining the real and perceived impacts of a public idea repository onliteracy and science inquiry. In Proceedings of the 11th Intl Conference for Computer SupportedCollaborative Learning, Gothenburg, Sweden: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Mullis, I.V. S. & Jenkins, L.B. (1988). The science report card: Elements of risk and recovery. Trends andachievement based on the 1986 national assessment (National Assessment of Educational Progress).Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service.NGSS Lead States (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies PressRivard, L. O. P. (1994), A review of writing to learn in science: Implications for practice and research. Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching (31), 969–983Roscoe, R. D., & McNamara, D. S. (2013). Writing Pal: Feasibility of an intelligent writing strategytutor in the high school classroom. Journal of Educational Psychology, 105(4), 1010-1025Berland, L. & Reiser, B. (2011) Classroom communities’ adaptations of the practice of scientific argumentation.Science Education, 95(2), 191-216.Sato, E. & Linn, M.C. (2014). Designing critique to improve conceptual understanding. In Polman, J. L., et al.(Eds.). Learning and becoming in practice: The International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS)2014, Vol 1. Boulder, CO: International Society of the Learning Sciences.ICLS 2016 Proceedings401© ISLS