Learning about Team Members’ Preferences:Computer-Supported Preference Awareness in theNegotiation Preparation of TeamsDaniel Thiemann, Knowledge Media Research Center, d.thiemann@iwm-kmrc.deTanja Engelmann, Practice for Giftedness and High Achievement Potential, kontakt@hochbegabung-stuttgart.deFriedrich W. Hesse, Knowledge Media Research Center, f.hesse@iwm-kmrc.deAbstract: Although members of a negotiation team form one joint negotiation party, theyoften have different preferences within the team. This impairs the team’s negotiationperformance. Learning about the team members’ preferences in order to align them to accuratejoint priorities for the negotiation therefore becomes an important part of the negotiationpreparation. This experimental study examines, whether computer-supported awareness aboutthe team members’ preferences (i.e. Preference Awareness) helps to foster the knowledgeabout these preferences within the team and thereby leads to accurate team priorities. 150participants were randomly assigned to teams of three members with different preferences ineither a condition with or without Preference Awareness. They had to prepare jointly for anupcoming negotiation via audio conference. In the condition with Preference Awareness, thepriorities, which were stated by the team members afterwards, covered the preferences of allteam members significantly better than in the condition without awareness.Keywords: preference awareness, negotiation teams, negotiation preparation, negotiation performance,computer-supported learningIntroductionConflicts between groups are widespread. They do not only occur in many situations of everyday life, but alsobetween different organizations, (working-) teams, school classes, political parties and nations (van Kleef,Steinel & Homan, 2012). One of the most common and constructive ways to solve such conflicts is throughnegotiation. Especially when the situation is very complex and complicated, negotiation teams are used to solvethe issues (Brett, Behfar & Friedman 2009). The reason for that is the expected broader range of resources,skills, knowledge and information teams can contribute compared to individuals (Mesmer-Magnus &DeChurch, 2009; van Ginkel, 2007).Yet, studies that compare the negotiation performances of negotiation teams with those of solonegotiators show no general superiority of teams (Cronin & Weingart, 2007; Morgan & Tindale, 2002;Thompson et al., 1996). The use of negotiation teams is rather associated with particular difficulties due to ahigher complexity when several individuals are supposed to cooperate as one negotiation party (Lewicki,Saunders & Barry, 2007).Behfar, Friedman and Brett (2008) investigated such difficulties by analyzing organizationalnegotiation teams in the work context. The main problem which was stated out in this analysis lies in the teamitself: Although the members of a negotiation team form one joint negotiation party, they often have differentpreferences for an upcoming negotiation (Behfar et al., 2008). If these aren’t exchanged and aligned by the teammembers prior to the negotiation in order to agree on joint priorities, they achieve poorer negotiation results fortheir team, especially when there is integrative potential (Halevy, 2008). Integrative potential is given, whenthere are negotiation issues which are differently important for the negotiation parties. This is the case in mostnegotiation situations (Swaab, Galinsky, Medvec & Diermeier, 2012). Then mutually profitable trade-offs arepossible between the negotiation parties. This means, that concessions are made on negotiation issues of lowpriority for the own party, but high priority for the other party, to get in return concessions on issues of highpriority for the own, but low priority for the other party (e.g. Ten Velden, Beersma & De Dreu, 2007).To be able to make such mutually profitable trade-offs with the other negotiation party in favor of thewhole team, the team members need to have knowledge about all team members’ preferences and have to agreeon what the joint team priorities are. Importantly, this alignment process has to take place prior to thenegotiation. The negotiation preparation of the team therefore becomes an essential part of the negotiationprocess.But teams often insufficiently prepare for an upcoming negotiation (Brett et al., 2009). Furthermore,there are various collaboration barriers which hinder the proper exchange and alignment of team members’CSCL 2015 Proceedings557© ISLSpreferences within the team. A number of findings show, that members of teams discuss more about sharedinformation and common preferences during team discussions, whereas unique information or preferences areoften neglected (Bowman & Wittenbaum, 2012; Stasser & Titus, 1985). Additionally, complex issues oftenrequire the participation of experts from different fields, who are often hindered to meet in person but have toprepare computer-supported in a virtual environment, for example via the telecommunication applicationsoftware Skype. In such virtual contexts, there is less contextual information than in face-to-face situations andalso the social presence is reduced (Martinez-Moreno, Zornoza, Gonzalez-Navarro & Thompson, 2012). Thismakes it even more difficult to develop a model about the knowledge of others (cf. Engelmann & Hesse, 2010)or about which information and preference backgrounds the other team members have.Solution approach: Preference AwarenessHints for a solution to these problems are provided by the Knowledge and Information Awareness approach(Keller, Tergan & Coffey, 2006). Findings show, that group members reach better solutions in computersupported collaborative problem solving tasks when they are informed about the knowledge and its underlyinginformation of their collaborators (i.e. Knowledge and Information Awareness; Engelmann, Tergan & Hesse,2010). Additionally the exchange of unshared information is fostered (Engelmann & Hesse, 2011). Based onthese findings, the concept of Preference Awareness was developed by the first author, defined as beinginformed about the team members’ preferences for an upcoming negotiation. It is expected, that computersupported Preference Awareness during the negotiation preparation fosters the exchange and alignment ofpreferences within negotiation teams and thereby leads to a better knowledge about the joint team prioritiesamong the team members.MethodTo examine the postulated effects of Preference Awareness, an experimental study with university students wasconducted. One-hundred-fifty participants (119 female, 31 male, Mage = 23.33, SDage = 2.97, age range: 18–32)were randomly assigned to a condition with Preference Awareness or a condition without Awareness and then toteams of three members, representing a water-supply corporation. This resulted in 50 teams, with 25 teams percondition.In this economic scenario, the team members had to prepare jointly for a negotiation with anothercorporation about the distribution of ten building grounds for water-supply companies in Africa. The negotiationpreparation took place computer-supported via audio-conference in three different rooms. Within the team, eachteam member took over the role of one manager of the corporation with individual preferences for nine differentattributes of the building grounds (e.g. water quality, transport possibilities, cultural environment). The valuesfor the preferences ranged from 0 to 100 and were presented in a spreadsheet, graphically supported by differentsized bar charts. In the condition with computer-supported Preference Awareness, each member could see thepreferences of all team members in the spreadsheet during the audio conference. In contrast, in the conditionwithout awareness, each team member could only see his/her own preferences. So the Preference AwarenessTool enabled the team members to have direct access to all team members’ preferences on the computer screenin a structured way during the audio conference. For better discrimination, different colors were used for the barcharts of each team member. The team members were told that the time to prepare for the upcoming negotiationwas limited to 20 minutes and that the presented information would only be available during this audioconference, but no further instructions were given. So it was up to them if and how they used the availableinformation offered by the Preference Awareness on the computer screen during their discussion.When the audio conference was finished, all team members were individually asked what prioritiesthey would pursue for their team, if they were selected to represent it in the upcoming negotiation. Thereforeeach team member was asked to rank the nine attributes of the building grounds by importance. In order torepresent the whole team, the amount of knowledge about the joint team priorities gained during the audioconference was crucial. The accurate team priorities resulted, when all team members’ preferences wereconsidered equally. So the perfect ranking for the joint team priorities could be achieved by averaging theindividual preference values of all team members for each of the nine attributes. It was expected that PreferenceAwareness during the negotiation preparation would help the team members to learn about the preferenceswithin the team and thereby would lead to priorities for the negotiation, which cover all team members’preferences to a higher extent.Additionally it was also tested, how well the single team members could judge the importance of fivebuilding grounds for the whole team via ranking. The purpose of this task was to test, if the knowledge aboutteam members' preferences could also be transferred to the judgment of concrete issues for the negotiation. Foreach building ground it was therefore presented how well it covers the nine attributes by stars from one to ten. InCSCL 2015 Proceedings558© ISLSorder to rank the building grounds accurately, one had to consider the accurate team priorities. The more stars abuilding ground had in attributes which were important for the whole negotiation team, the more valuable itwas. The quality of the ranking of the building grounds serves as an indicator of whether the team membersknew which profitable trade-offs could be made for the whole team. This is an important requirement forachieving good negotiation results (e.g. Ten Velden, Beersma & De Dreu, 2007). Therefore the task is a directindicator for the expected negotiation performance.FindingsTo analyze the data statistically, it was aggregated on group-level because of the interdependence of the teammembers within a team.First it was analyzed, if Preference Awareness fosters the knowledge about the accurate joint prioritieswithin the team. Therefore the deviation of the rankings stated by the team members from the accurate rankingbased on the averaged preferences was calculated and summed up for each team. The priority rankings of teammembers with computer-supported Preference Awareness during the negotiation preparation deviatedsignificantly less from the accurate team priorities (M = 12.48, SD = 7.30) than the rankings of team memberswithout awareness (M = 22.64, SD =11.82, t(48) = -3.657, p = .001). So the hypothesis, that PreferenceAwareness during the negotiation preparation fosters the knowledge about the accurate joint priorities within theteam, can be confirmed.Furthermore the rankings of the building grounds were analyzed in order to find out whether the teammembers knew which profitable trade-offs could be made for the whole team. Therefore it was calculated, howmuch the rankings of the members of each team for the five building grounds deviated from the accurateranking based on the accurate team priorities. The rankings of team members with computer-supportedPreference Awareness during the negotiation preparation deviated significantly less from the accurate ranking(M = 7.36, SD = 5.47) than the rankings of team members without Awareness (M = 12.48, SD = 8.65, t(48) = 2.502, p = .016). So members of teams with Preference Awareness during the negotiation preparation werebetter able to judge the importance of the different negotiation issues for the team accurately in a transfer task.The findings are illustrated in figure 1.Figure 1. Deviations from accurate priority ranking (left) and accurate ranking for the building grounds (right)on team-level with 95% confidence interval for the experimental condition with Preference Awareness and thecontrol condition without awareness.CSCL 2015 Proceedings559© ISLSConclusions and implicationsThe results of this experimental study show that computer-supported Preference Awareness not only fosters theknowledge about the accurate joint priorities within negotiation teams. A further transfer task showed that it alsoenables the team members to judge the importance of the different negotiation issues for the team accurately.This is an important indicator for the expected negotiation performance: the team members do not only have toknow the priorities of the whole team, but also need to be able to transfer this knowledge to an accuratejudgment of the negotiation issues. To know the importance of each negotiation issue for the team is crucial inorder to act as a unit and claim the demands of the whole team during the negotiation. It is furthermore anecessary requirement for the ability of the team members to know which profitable trade-offs could be madewith the other negotiation party in favor of the whole team. Otherwise trade-offs are made, which are notbeneficial for the team. This impairs the negotiation performance and consequently the negotiation result.So it can be concluded, that Preference Awareness is a very promising approach to optimize thenegotiation preparation of teams, especially when the team cannot meet in person but prepares computersupported. In this experiment, the concept of Preference Awareness was tested in an economic scenario with astudent sample. However, due to the promising results, it is highly recommended to implement this PreferenceAwareness-Tool in the negotiation preparation of real organizational teams. But this approach also has thepotential to be extended to other collaborative situations in which the awareness about the group members’individual preferences could be useful, for example in order to get to a team decision. It could also be veryvaluable for a learning group in order to help its members to agree on joint learning contents and goals. Furtherstudies should therefore investigate the implementation of Preference Awareness in more settings.ReferencesBehfar, K., Friedman, R. A., & Brett, J. M. (2008). The Team Negotiation Challenge: Defining and Managingthe Internal Challenges of Negotiating Teams. IACM 21st Annual Conference Paper.Bowman, J. M., & Wittenbaum, G. M. (2012). Time pressure affects process and performance in hidden profilesgroups. Small Group Research, 43, 245-314. doi:10.1177/1046496412440055Brett, J., Behfar, K., & Friedman, R. (2009). How to Manage Your Negotiating Team. Harvard BusinessReview, 105-109.Cronin, M. A., & Weingart, L. R. (2007). Representational gaps, information processing, and conflict infunctionally diverse teams. Academy of Management Review, 32, 761-773.Engelmann, T., & Hesse, F. W. (2010). How digital concept maps about the collaborators’ knowledge andinformation influence computer-supported collaborative problem solving. International Journal ofComputer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 5(3), 299–320.Engelmann, T. & Hesse, F. W. (2011). Fostering sharing of unshared knowledge by having access to thecollaborators’ meta-knowledge structures. Computers in Human Behavior, 27, 2078-2087.Engelmann, T., Tergan, S.-O. & Hesse, F. W. (2010). Evoking knowledge and information awareness forenhancing computer-supported collaborative problem solving. The Journal of Experimental Education,78, 1-20.Halevy, N. (2008). Team negotiation: Social, epistemic, economic, and psychological consequences of subgroupconflict. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34, 1687–1702.Keller, T., Tergan, S.-O. & Coffey, J. (2006). Concept maps used as a “knowledge and information awareness”tool for supporting collaborative problem solving in distributed groups. In A. J. Cañas & J. D. Novak(Eds.), Concept Maps: Theories, Methodology, Technology. Proceedings of the Second InternationalConference on Concept Mapping (pp. 128-135). San José: Sección de Impresión del SIEDIN.Lewicki, R. J., Saunders, D. M., & Barry, B. (2007). Essentials of Negotiation (4th ed.). Boston: Irwin/McGrawHill.Martinez-Moreno, E., Zornoza, A., Gonzalez-Navarro, P., & Thompson, L. F. (2012). Investigating face-to-faceand virtual teamwork over time: When does early task conflict trigger relationship conflict? GroupDynamics: Theory Research and Practice, 16(3), 159-171. doi: 10.1037/a0029569Mesmer-Magnus, J. R., & DeChurch, L. A. (2009). Information sharing and team performance: A metaanalysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 94, 535-546.CSCL 2015 Proceedings560© ISLSMorgan, P. M., & Tindale, R. S. (2002). Group vs. individual performance in mixed-motive situations:Exploring an inconsistency. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 87, 44-65.Stasser, G., & Titus, W. (1985). Pooling of unshared information in group decision making: Biased informationsampling during discussion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48, 1467-1478.Swaab, R. I., Galinsky, A. D., Medvec, V. & Diermeier, D. A. (2012). The communication orientation model:Explaining the diverse effects of sight, sound, and synchronicity on negotiation and group decisionmaking outcomes. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 16(1), 25-53.Ten Velden, F. S. T., Beersma, B., & De Dreu, C. K. W. (2007). Majority and minority influence in groupnegotiation: The moderating effects of social motivation and decision rules. Journal of AppliedPsychology, 92, 259–268.Thompson, L., Peterson, E., & Brodt, S. (1996). Team negotiation: An examination of integrative anddistributive bargaining. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 66-78.van Ginkel, W. P. (2007). The use of distributed information in decision making groups: The role of shared taskrepresentations. Doctoral Dissertation, Erasmus University, Rotterdam.van Kleef, G. A., Steinel, W., & Homan, A. C. (2012). On Being Peripheral and Paying Attention:Prototypicality and Information Processing in Intergroup Conflict. Journal of Applied Psychology.Advance online publication. doi: 10.1037/a003098CSCL 2015 Proceedings561© ISLS