Learning Alone or Together? A Combination Can Be Best!Jennifer K. Olsen, Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, jkolsen@cs.cmu.eduNikol Rummel, Institute of Educational Research, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, nikol.rummel@rub.deVincent Aleven, Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, aleven@cs.cmu.eduAbstract: Collaborative and individual learning are both frequently used in classrooms tosupport learning. However, little research has investigated the benefits of combiningindividual and collaborative learning, as compared to learning only individually or onlycollaboratively. With our study, we address this research gap. We compared a combinedcondition to individual-only or collaborative-only learning conditions using intelligenttutoring systems for fractions. The study was conducted with 382 4th and 5th grade students.Students across all three conditions had significant learning gains. However, the combinedcondition had higher learning gains than the individual or collaborative condition. Thisdifference was more pronounced for 4 th grade students than for 5th grade students. In addition,we found that students in the combined condition expressed higher situational interest in theactivity compared to those working individually and the same as students working onlycollaboratively. Through a combination, we may support better student learning.IntroductionAlthough collaborative and individual learning are both frequently used in the classroom, little research hasbeen done to investigate if and when their combination is more effective than either one alone. Computersupported collaborative learning (CSCL) research has combined social planes (i.e., individual, collaborative,whole class) within learning activities using integrative scripts (Dillenbourg, 2004) that prescribe differentsocial planes for different phases of a learning activity (Dillenbourg, 2004; Diziol, Rummel, Spada, & McLaren,2007). For example, integrative CSCL scripts based on the Jigsaw method have people work individually togain expertise in an area before working in expert groups and then mixed expert groups to share that expertise(Aronson, 1978). Although these scripts use a combination of collaborative and individual learning, they areoften only compared to individual only interventions and not to collaborative only interventions when theireffectiveness is investigated. Collaborative and individual learning may each have different strengths thatinfluence the learning process in productive ways; each may be more beneficial than the other for certain typesof knowledge (Mullins, Rummel, & Spada, 2011). One might hypothesize, therefore, that a combination ofcollaborative and individual learning can be more effective in supporting student learning than learning withineither of the social planes separately (i.e., collaborative or individual learning), especially when the combinationis set up in a way that plays to the strengths of each of the two learning modes. However, it is also possible thatswitching between social planes adds overhead to the learning process, which could have a negative impact onthe student performance that outweighs the benefits of a combination, even if this combination is aligned totheir particular strengths. Hence, it is important to understand whether combining individual and collaborativelearning, in a way that aligns with their respective strengths, is more effective than individual or collaborativelearning alone. In this paper, we investigate this question, using different versions of an intelligent tutoringsystem (ITS) for elementary school fractions learning as a platform.Previous research that has compared collaborative and individual learning has found mixed results:some studies found that collaboration is more beneficial, whereas other studies found that individual learning ismore beneficial (Lou et al., 2001). These mixed results may be due to how the collaboration and individuallearning is being aligned with the learning activities and how the collaborative and individual learning phasesare being combined, if at all, in the collaborative learning scenario. Collaborative learning may be beneficial bysupporting students in giving and receiving explanations as well as the opportunity to co-construct knowledgewith their partner (Hausmann, Chi, & Roy, 2004). In addition, discussions that happen during collaboration canpotentially support the students’ social goals (e.g., responsibility goals, popularity goals) and make them feelmore connected to their group members, which can increase their motivation for the activity (Rogat,Linnenbrink-Garcia, & DiDonato, 2013) and increase the desire to continue working on the task. Specifically,situational interest in the task, which is interest that arises due to a response to the factors in the environment(Linnenbrink-Garcia et al., 2010), can increase when a task involves collaboration. On the other hand, forproblem-solving practice, individual learning may be more beneficial than collaborative learning. Workingindividually may allow students to get more practice in the same amount of time and develop fluency (Mullinset al., 2011) since students are not sharing tasks with a partner and do not necessarily have to pause to explainCSCL 2017 Proceedings95© ISLStheir actions. In light of these different strengths, collaboration may be better for conceptually orientedactivities, such as working on erroneous examples, and individual work may be better for procedurally orientedactivities, such as tutored problem solving.To design a mixed collaborative/individual condition, we created learning activities that would play tothe strengths of the given social plane; specifically, we used erroneous examples for collaborative learning andtutored problem solving for individual learning. Within research on example-based learning, both workedexamples and erroneous examples have been shown to be successful for supporting learning (Renkl, 2005;McLaren, et al., 2012; Tsovaltzi et al. 2010). In addition, prior research shows that when students study workedexamples collaboratively, they tend to avoid shallow processing, ask for fewer hints, and spend more time onexplanations than when working individually (Hausmann, Nokes, VanLehn, & van de Sande, 2009). Further,erroneous examples can help to foster reflection and more fruitful explanations (Isotani et al, 2011; Siegler,1995; Tsovaltzi et al., 2009). When students are able to collaborate around erroneous examples, they maybenefit from engaging in sense-making with their partner, fostered both through the erroneous examples and thecollaborative learning. On the other hand, for tutored problem solving, tutors often support student learningthrough step-by-step support. This step-by-step support focuses the attention of the student on one step at a time,which can lead to students entering an answer as soon as it is known instead of having a discussion around theproblem (Mullins, Rummel, & Spada, 2011). When students are working individually, they do not have todivide tasks with another student, or stop often to discuss a problem step, which likely allows each student to getmore practice with the problem-solving skills. In turn, more practice with the problems may allow the studentsto build more fluency and procedural knowledge (Anderson, 1983). When students are able to work individuallyaround the tutored problem solving, they may benefit from the faster-paced practice that is fostered from boththe step-by-step nature of the problems and the individual learning.In this study, we investigated our hypothesis that a combination of collaborative and individuallearning is more effective for student learning than the same tasks being performed only collaboratively orindividually. Specifically, we investigated the combination of students working collaboratively on erroneousexamples and individually on tutored problem solving. The study involved 382 students and ran over five classperiods. To test our hypothesis, we assigned students to three different conditions (i.e., mixed, collaborativeonly, individually only). In addition, we measured the situational interest in the tutor for the students. Wehypothesized that students who have a chance to work collaboratively (i.e., mixed and collaborative onlyconditions) will have more situational interest in the activity than students that only work individually.MethodsTutor designAs mentioned, we used a fractions ITS as a platform for our research. ITSs have been shown to be beneficial forstudent learning (Kulik & Fletcher, 2015; Ma, Adesope, Nesbit, & Liu, 2014) and are effective by providingcognitive support for students as they work through problem-solving activities. This cognitive support comes inthe form of step-level guidance, namely, an interface that makes all steps visible, error feedback, and on-demandhints (VanLehn, 2006). Although the majority of ITSs have been developed for individual use, the integration ofcollaboration within an ITS, in prior studies, has effectively supported learning (Baghaei & Mitrovic, 2005;Diziol et al., 2010; Olsen Rummel, & Aleven, 2016). The support for the collaboration can be directlyembedded into the tutor to support the students both cognitively and socially.Informed by prior work on fractions tutors (Olsen, Belenky, Aleven, & Rummel, 2014a; Olsen,Rummel, & Aleven, 2016), we developed a new ITS for three fractions units: equivalent fractions, leastcommon denominator, and comparing fractions. The ITS versions were built with the Cognitive TutoringAuthoring Tools (CTAT), extended to support collaborative tutors (Olsen et al., 2014b). For each of the threeunits, we created both tutored problem-solving activities (see Figure 1) and erroneous examples (see Figure 2).Further, we created both individual and collaborative versions of both types of activities, for use in differentconditions. For each unit, there were eight problems. All of the problems within a unit were of the same type.For the tutored problem solving, the students went through the steps needed to solve each problem. Forexample, for the unit on comparing fractions, students would first find the least common denominator for thefractions they were trying to compare (see Figure 1), then convert all of the fractions using this commondenominator, and finally, put the fractions in order, from smallest to largest. For the erroneous examples, thestudents were asked to go through the process of finding the error that a fictional student had made in a problem(these were common errors that were made in the tutored problem solving problems), correct the error, andprovide advice to the student for what they should do in the future. For example, for the least commondenominator unit shown in Figure 2, students first needed to identify the error that Kaitie made. AfterCSCL 2017 Proceedings96© ISLSidentifying Kaitie’s error, the students were asked to correct the error in the original problem. The students werethen given a space to write a message to Kaitie about what she could do differently the next time sheencountered similar problems.Figure 1. A collaborative tutored problem-solving problem for comparing fractions. The students go through thesteps of converting fractions as a general mathematical procedure for solving this type of problem.Figure 2. A collaborative erroneous example for least common denominators. The students are asked to find thetype of mistake that the student in the problem has made (Panel A) and to then fix that mistake (top left).The collaborative tutors were supported with embedded collaborative scripts for each tutor problem toprovide social support for students (Kollar, Fischer, & Hesse, 2006). The collaborative tutors supportedsynchronous, networked collaboration, in which collaborating students sat at their own computer and had ashared (though differentiated) view of the problem state and different actions/resources available to them. Thestudents sat next to each other and communicated through speech, which was recorded. The groups were presetin the system and after students signed into their account, the system was able to share their problem space. Theembedded scripts supported collaboration through a distribution of responsibility to create accountability andCSCL 2017 Proceedings97© ISLSinterdependence (Slavin, 1989) and cognitive group awareness (Janssen & Bodemer, 2013). In Figure 1, thescreen shows that this student only received three of the five given fraction symbols in the problem (theirpartner had the second half). The students are responsible for sharing their fractions to be able to find the correctleast common denominator and to convert the fractions. In Figure 2, panel A shows an example of support forcognitive group awareness where each student has to answer the question individually, the students are showneach other’s answer, and then need to provide a group answer. When correcting the problem, the students eachneed to press the OK button to get feedback from the tutor. This prevents just one student doing the problemalone. Besides these collaboration script features, the collaborative and individual ITSs were identical.Design and procedureThe quasi-experimental study was conducted in a classroom setting with 382 4th and 5th grade students between18 classrooms (7 fourth grade and 11 fifth grade), 12 math teachers, and five school districts. The study tookplace during the students’ regular class periods. All students worked with the fractions ITS described above. Atthe class level, students were randomly assigned to one of three conditions: mixed, collaborative, or individual.Seven classes were assigned to the mixed condition, 6 classes to the collaborative only condition, and 5 classesto the individual only condition. In the mixed condition, the students worked collaboratively on the erroneousexamples and individually on the tutored problem-solving activities to align with the strengths of the socialplanes. In the other conditions, students either worked collaboratively on both types of problems or individuallyon both types of problems. In all three conditions, the erroneous examples for a unit came before the proceduralproblems to allow the students to address errors before getting more instruction through the procedural problemssets (Renkl & Atkinson, 2003). Also, students in all conditions completed one unit each day; they switched fromthe erroneous examples to the tutored problem-solving activities half way through class. Within each class, allof the students were instructed to switch problem sets at the same time. Because the time-on-task was constantfor all conditions within each unit, the students finished a different number of problems. Within each class,teachers paired their students based on who would work well together and had similar math abilities to avoidextreme differences that could hinder collaboration. Students worked with the same partner as much as possibleand only changed partners due to absenteeism. If a student’s partner was absent in the collaborative conditions,the student would be paired with another student working in the same condition for the remainder of the study.When students started with a different partner from the day before, they would begin on the problem set at theplace of the student who had made less progress.The study ran across five class periods of 45 minutes each. On the first day, the students took thepretest individually. At the beginning of the second day, the students took a short tutorial either individually orin groups (aligning with their social mode for the erroneous examples) that gave some instruction on how tointeract with the tutor. The students then worked with the tutor for the next three days in their condition. On thefifth day, the students took a posttest individually and answered a short survey to gauge their situational interestwhen working with the tutors.Dependent measuresFor the study, we collected pretest and posttest measures, tutor log data, and situational interest measures. Weassessed students’ fractions knowledge at two different times using two equivalent test forms incounterbalanced fashion. The tests targeted isomorphic problems for both the erroneous and procedurallyoriented tutors and were administered on the computer. The tests also had transfer problems for naming,making, adding, and subtracting fractions. Each test had 15 questions, seven erroneous example, six problemsolving, and two fractions explanations questions. For each question on the test, the students were able to get apoint for each step completed correctly. On the tests there were 81 possible points for the 13 erroneous exampleand procedural knowledge questions. To assess the students’ situational interest in the tutoring activity, we hadthe students answer a brief survey of 12 questions. The questions were adapted from the Linnenbrink-Garcia etal. (2010) situational interest scale. The questions were all written to ask about the time that was spent learningwith the tutoring system. Each question was presented to the student on a Likert scale that ranged from one toseven. The total score could range from 12 to 84.ResultsOut of the 382 students who participated in the study, 75 students were excluded from the analyses because ofabsenteeism during parts of the study, thus leaving us with a final set of 307 students. Out of the 307 students,104 were in the collaborative only condition, 83 in the individual only condition, and 120 in the mixedcondition. There was no significant difference between conditions with respect to the number of studentsexcluded, F(379,2) = 0.59, p = .56. There was, however, a significant difference in the pretest scores acrossCSCL 2017 Proceedings98© ISLSconditions, F(2, 304) = 9.4, p < .05, with the collaborative only group being significantly lower than the othertwo conditions.Learning gainsTo investigate whether students learned using our tutors and if there was a difference in learning between thestudents in the different conditions, we used a multilevel approach to take into account differences betweenschool districts and the repeated measures of the pretest and posttest. We used a hierarchical linear model(HLM) with student at the first level and school district at the second level. At level 1, we modeled the pretestand posttest scores along with the student’s grade (4th or 5th) and condition, and at level 2, we accounted fordifferences that could be attributed to the school district. For the different variables, we chose pretest for the testbaseline, mixed condition for the condition baseline, and 4th grade for the grade baseline. For each variable, themodel includes a term for each comparison between the baseline and other levels of the variable. We did notinclude dyads as a level because of the added complexity of some students working with no partner (i.e.individuals), some students having one partner, and some students having two partners because of absenteeism.We are aware of non-independence issues such as common fate and reciprocal influence within dyads that mayhave impacted our results (Cress, 2008). We measured the effect size with Pearson’s correlation coefficient (r)where 0.1 is considered a small effect size, 0.3 a medium effect size, and 0.5 a large effect size.Figure 3. The students worked either collaboratively and individually (M), only collaboratively (C), oronly individually (I) with the mixed condition having higher learning gains than the other conditions. This effectwas more pronounced in the 4th grade students than the 5th grade students.The results from the pretest and posttest analysis are shown in Figure 3. There was a significantdifference between pretest and posttest scores, t(301) = 12.56, p < .05, r = .59, with the posttest scores beinghigher across all conditions. For the condition differences, there was a significant difference betweencollaborative only and mixed, t(297) = -3.12, p < .05, r = .18, and a marginally significant difference betweenindividual only and mixed, t(297) = -1.83, p = .07, r = .11, with mixed condition having higher test scores thanthe other conditions. There was a significant interaction between pretest/posttest and collaborative/mixedconditions, t(301) = -2.78, p < .05, r = .16, and a significant interaction between pretest/posttest andindividual/mixed conditions, t(301) = -3.56, p < .05, r = .2, with the learning gain slope being higher for themixed conditions than the other conditions, supporting our hypothesis that the mixed condition would be moreeffective for learning. For the student’s grade level (i.e., 4 th v. 5th grade), there was a significant main effect ofgrade, t(297) = 2.93, p < .05, r = .17, with the 5 th graders having higher test scores than the 4th grade students.Surprisingly, there was a significant interaction between grade and pretest and posttest, t(301) = -5.53, p < .05, r= .3, indicating that the 4 th graders had higher learning gains than the 5th graders. There was not a significantinteraction between grade and individual/mixed conditions or collaborative/mixed conditions, t(297) = 0.90, p =.37 and t(297) = 0.80, p = .42. For the three way interactions, there were a significant interactions for both theCSCL 2017 Proceedings99© ISLSpretest/posttest, grade, and collaborative/mixed conditions, t(301) = 4.57, p < .05, r = .25, and thepretest/posttest, grade, and individual/mixed conditions, t(301) = 3.19, p < .05, r = .18, with the slopedifferences between the mixed conditions and the other conditions being more pronounced for the 4th gradestudents than the 5th grade students. These interactions indicated that the mixed condition, compared to the otherconditions, was more beneficial for the learning gains of 4 th grade students than those of 5th grade students.Situational interestTo investigate the impact that working with a partner may have had on the student’s situational interest in thetutoring activity, we used an HLM with student at the first level and school district at the second level. At level1, we modeled the situational interest score and condition, and at level 2, we accounted for random differencesthat could be attributed to the school district. There was no significant difference between the collaborative onlycondition and the mixed condition, t(302.15) = -1.119, p = .26 (see Table 1). There was a significant differencebetween the students working individually only and the students in the mixed condition, t(299.83) = -3.978, p <.05, r = .22, such that the students in the mixed condition had a higher situational interest score. These resultsindicate that the students who had an opportunity to work with a partner found the task more immediatelymotivating and that working individually for part of the activity did not lower this motivation, although it did forstudents only working individually.Table 1: The situational interest score for each of the different conditionsConditionCollaborative OnlyIndividual OnlyMixedSituational Interest Score Percentage (SD)0.74 (0.20)0.59 (0.19)0.75 (0.16)Discussion and conclusionIn our classroom study we found that students across all conditions and grade levels learned from working witha tutoring system that supported both studying erroneous examples and problem-solving practice. Thus, theresults demonstrate the effectiveness of the instructional conditions. More interestingly, the results confirmedour hypothesis that a combination of collaborative and individual learning may be more beneficial than eitheralone, as was found across the 4th and 5th grades. Through a combination of collaborative and individuallearning, we are able to align the strengths of the tasks with the strengths of the social planes to better supportthe student learning. We did find that this result was more pronounced with the 4th grade than the 5th gradestudents. This difference may indicate that the given combination of individual and collaborative learning isparticularly effective early on in the learning process when students may need more support targeted at the skillsthey are trying to acquire. The 5 th grade students may have been at a stage where fluency building was moreproductive for their learning and the collaboration that supported sense making was not as important. If so, themixed condition would not have as much benefit for 5th grade students. These results resemble those from otherresearch where the age of the students had an impact on the effectiveness of the learning intervention (Mazziotti,Loibl, & Rummel, 2015). However, future work is needed to develop an understanding of when collaborativeand individual learning may be most effective. In addition, the 5th grade students in the collaborative onlycondition had higher learning gains than the other 5th grade conditions. However, this may be an effect ofdifferences on the pretest. The 5th grade collaborative only condition did not have significantly different posttestscores than the other 5th grade students.Additionally, in accordance with our hypothesis, we found that students who had a chance to workcollaboratively (mixed and collaborative only conditions) had higher situational interest in the tutoring task thanthose only working individually. The results support the notion that a collaborative setting can be moremotivating for students and that it can be so even when an individual component is added. The situationalinterest that arises from collaborating can influence the learning that happens around the domain knowledge.When students are more interested in a task, they are willing to put more time and effort into completing thattask (Rogat et al., 2013). Allowing students to collaborate on tasks that, a priori, would align well with thestrengths of collaboration (e.g., building conceptual knowledge) thus might be one way to both motivatestudents and to create a beneficial learning environment.This paper opens up a broader line of inquiry of research in CSCL that focuses on the question of howcollaborative and individual learning can most effectively be combined. In our study, we supported studentlearning through the use of erroneous examples and tutored problem solving. We chose these activity typesbecause the strengths of collaborative and individual learning had related strengths to the learning activities soCSCL 2017 Proceedings100© ISLSthat a combination may have built upon itself. Specifically, this combination may have been effective because itallowed the students to address misconceptions with a partner and thus develop a deeper understanding. Afteraddressing misconceptions, the students then had an opportunity to build fluency with individual problemsolving. This alignment of the learning activities with the hypothesized strengths of the social planes may haveenhanced the support to the students more than either could provide alone. Although our results support that thiscombination of collaborative and individual learning with the learning tasks was more effective than eithersocial plane alone, a limitation of our study is that we do not know what the most effective combination ofcollaborative and individual learning is and how the results from our combination would generalize. To be ableto find what combinations of collaborative and individual learning can be effective for learning, additionalresearch is needed. Our study indicates that this would be a promising direction for future research to explore. Inthis future exploration, it is important to consider how the switches between social planes are triggered. Forexample, we have explored switch points triggered by time on task. It may also be beneficial for students toswitch social planes adaptively based on switch points triggered by student characteristics, such as repeatederrors on a skill when working individually.The results of our study are notable because of the complexity in supporting both collaborative andindividual learning in the classroom and providing real-time support. This study adds to the CSCL literature bycomparing a combination of collaborative and individual learning to both social planes alone, which is so faruncommon. By finding support for the effectiveness of combining collaborative and individual learning, thispaper has opened a broader line of inquiry into how collaborative and individual learning can most effectivelybe combined to support learning. Within this space, we can begin to evaluate integrative scripts (Dillenbourg,2004) to better understand what aspects of the scripts are proving to be effective for student learning or if anycombination of social planes is enough to support students.ReferencesAnderson, J. R. (1983). The architecture of cognition. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.Aronson, E. (1978). The jigsaw classroom. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.Baghaei, N. & Mitrovic, A. (2005). COLLECT-UML: supporting individual and collaborative learning of UMLclass diagrams in a constraint-based intelligent tutoring system. In Int’l Conference on KnowledgeBased and Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems (pp. 458-464). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.Cress, U. (2008). The need for considering multilevel analysis in CSCL research–An appeal for the use of moreadvanced statistical methods. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning,3(1), 69–84.Dillenbourg, P. (2004). Framework for integrated learning. Kaleidoscope Network of Excellence deliverableD23.5.1.Diziol, D., Rummel, N., Spada, H., & McLaren, B.M. (2007). Promoting learning in mathematics: Scriptsupport for collaborative problem solving with the Cognitive Tutor Algebra. In C.A. Chinn, G. Erkens& S. Puntambekar (Eds.) Mice, minds and society. Proceedings of the Computer SupportedCollaborative Learning Conference (pp. 39-41). International Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc.Diziol, D., Walker, E., Rummel, N., & Koedinger, K. R. (2010). Using intelligent tutor technology to implementadaptive support for student collaboration. Educational Psychology Review, 22(1), 89-102.Hausmann, R. G., Chi, M. T., & Roy, M. (2004) Learning from collaborative problem solving: An analysis ofthree hypothesized mechanisms. In 26nd annual conference of the Cognitive Science society, 547-552.Hausmann, R. G., Nokes, T. J., VanLehn, K., & van de Sande, B. (2009). Collaborative Dialog While StudyingWorked-out Examples. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education. (pp. 596598).Isotani, S., Adams, D., Mayer, R. E., Durkin, K., Rittle-Johnson, B., & McLaren, B. M. (2011). Can erroneousexamples help middle-school students learn decimals? Towards Ubiquitous Learning (pp. 181-195).Springer Berlin Heidelberg.Janssen, J., & Bodemer, D. (2013). Coordinated computer-supported collaborative learning: Awareness andawareness tools. Educational Psychologist, 48(1), 40-55.Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Hesse, F. W. (2006). Collaboration scripts–a conceptual analysis. EducationalPsychology Review, 18(2), 159-185.Kulik, J. A. & Fletcher, J.D. (2015). Effectiveness of Intelligent Tutoring Systems: A Meta-Analytic Review.Review of Educational Research. Prepublished April 17, 2015. doi: 10.3102/0034654315581420Linnenbrink-Garcia, L., Durik, A. M., Conley, A. M., Barron, K. E., Tauer, J. M., Karabenick, S. A., &Harackiewicz, J. M. (2010). Measuring situational interest in academic domains. Educational andPsychological Measurement.CSCL 2017 Proceedings101© ISLSLou, Y., Abrami, P. C., & d’Apollonia, S. (2001). Small group and individual learning with technology: Ameta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 71(3), 449-521.Ma, W., Adesope, O. O., Nesbit, J. C., & Liu, Q. (2014). Intelligent tutoring systems and learning outcomes: Ameta-analysis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 106(4), 901-918.Mazziotti, C., Loibl, K., & Rummel, N. (2015). Collaborative or Individual Learning within Productive Failure:Does the Social Form of Learning Make a Difference? In O. Lindwall et al. (Eds.), Proceedings of the11 th International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, (570-575). Gothenberg,Sweden.McLaren, B. M., Adams, D., Durkin, K., Goguadze, G., Mayer, R. E., Rittle-Johnson, B., Sosnovsky, S.,Isotani, S., & Van Velsen, M. (2012). To err is human, to explain and correct is divine: A study ofinteractive erroneous examples with middle school math students. In 21st Century Learning for 21stCentury Skills (pp. 222-235). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.Mullins, D., Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2011). Are two heads always better than one? Differential effects ofcollaboration on students’ computer-supported learning in mathematics. International Journal ofComputer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6(3), 421-443.Olsen, J. K., Belenky, D. M., Aleven, A., & Rummel, N. (2014a). Using an intelligent tutoring system tosupport collaborative as well as individual learning. In S. Trausan-Matu, K. E. Boyer, M. Crosby, & K.Panourgia (Eds), Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems,(pp. 134-143). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.Olsen, J. K., Belenky, D. M., Aleven, A., Rummel, N., Sewall, J., & Ringenberg, M. (2014b). Authoring toolsfor collaborative intelligent tutoring system environments. In S. Trausan-Matu, K. E. Boyer, M.Crosby, & K. Panourgia (Eds), Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on IntelligentTutoring Systems, (pp. 523-528). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.Olsen, J. K., Rummel, N., & Aleven, V. (2016). Investigating effects of embedding collaboration in anintelligent tutoring system for elementary school students. In C. K. Looi, J. Polman, U. Cress, & P.Reimann (Eds.), Proceedings of the 12th international conference of the learning sciences, ICLS 2016(Vol. I, pp. 338-345). Singapore: International Society of the Learning Sciences.Renkl, A. (2005). The worked-out example principle in multimedia learning. In R. Mayer (Ed.), CambridgeHandbook of Multimedia Learning (pp. 229-246). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Renkl, A. & Atkinson, R. K. (2003). Structuring the transition from example study to problem solving incognitive skill acquisition: A cognitive load perspective. Educational psychologist, 38(1), 15-22.Rogat, T. K., Linnenbrink-Garcia, L., & DiDonato, N. (2013). Motivation in collaborative groups. Internationalhandbook of collaborative learning, 250-267.Siegler, R. S. (1995). How does change occur: A microgenetic study of number conservation. Cognitivepsychology, 28(3), 225-273.Slavin, R. E. (1989). Cooperative learning and student achievement: Six theoretical perspectives. Advances inMotivation and Achievement, 6, 161-177. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, Inc.Tsovaltzi, D., Melis, E., Mclaren, B. M., Dietrich, M., Goguadze, G., & Meyer, A. K. (2009). Erroneousexamples: A preliminary investigation into learning benefits. In Learning in the Synergy of MultipleDisciplines (pp. 688-693). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.Tsovaltzi, D., Melis, E., McLaren, B.M., Meyer, A-K., Dietrich, M. & Goguadze, G. (2010). Learning fromerroneous examples: When and how do students benefit from them? In Wolpers, M., Kirschner P.A.,Scheffel, M., Lindstaedt, S. & Dimitrova, V. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 5th European Conference onTechnology Enhanced Learning, Sustaining TEL: From Innovation to Learning and Practice,Barcelona, Spain. (pp. 357-373). Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.VanLehn, K. (2006). The behavior of tutoring systems. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence inEducation, 16(3), 227-265.AcknowledgmentsWe thank Amos Glenn, Christian Hartmann, and the CTAT team. This work was supported by GraduateTraining Grant #R305B090023 and by Award #R305A120734 from the US Department of Education (IES).CSCL 2017 Proceedings102© ISLS