Playing with Gameful Activities and Assessments:Avatars and Experience Points in a Graduate CourseBeaumie Kim, University of Calgary, beaumie.kim@ucalgary.caAbstract: The community of learning scientists is increasingly valuing games and gamebased learning environments to engage players and learners in their pursuits. In highereducation, instructors, especially those who teach game-related topics, attempt to incorporategame principles into the course activities and assessments, and found their efforts motivationalfor students. I argue that participating in gameful assessments and activities are important forteachers, not only to explore new ways of designing learning experiences, but also to betterunderstand the gaming context of young people they work with. This paper introduces thedesign of a course that engaged graduate students in the concepts and practices of game-basedlearning. Specifically, I discuss the design of using avatars and gaining experience points aspart of their course activities and assessments mediated by a social media technology, andhow learners were engaged in the course in a gameful manner.Keywords: gameful assessment, graduate course, avatar, game-based learningI do not play video games and to be honest, I feel a high level of anxiety whenever I use thecontrollers of consoles such as the ones for the x-box and PS3 although my children are ableto use them flawlessly.Ms. Pacman, Reflection PaperIntroductionConcerned about providing meaningful learning, many higher education instructors strive to provide authenticcontexts analogous to the knowledge usage outside of academia in preparing future practitioners in theirdisciplinary practices (Herrington & Herrington, 2006). One important and authentic practice in teachereducation should be about playful and gameful learning: teachers’ practices involve young people who are aptlearners in their social worlds, invent new ways of doing things, and examine their own practices, includingtheir game play (Thomas & Brown, 2011). Some instructors incorporated game principles into the courseactivities and assessments, and found their efforts motivational for students (Fishman & Aguilar, 2012; Sheldon,2011). It is acknowledged that many behaviours and efforts involved in gameplay (e.g., risk-taking, persistence,problem-solving, concentration) are highly valued in many life situations. On the other hand, many perceive thattime spent in playing games in all ages is wasted and could be used elsewhere. Similarly, teachers may notidentify with today’s generation of young students as gamers, as seen from Ms. Pacman’s (screen name of astudent) reflection above. I argue that participating in gameful assessments and activities should also be valuedfor its authenticity in the context of in-service teacher education (i.e., facilitating learning for young people). Inthe past years, using game-like elements in (or gamification of) higher education courses has gained attention tosupport students’ meaningful experience (Johnson, Adams Becker, Estrada, & Freeman, 2014; Sheldon, 2011).Borrowing the term ‘gameful’ used by McGonigal (2011), this paper introduces the design of a summer coursein the Master of Education program on Digital Game-Based Learning at a Western Canadian university anddescribe how the participating students interacted with course activities in a gameful manner.Perspective on gameful learningThe efforts to incorporate gameful activities and assessments in higher education are growing not only for thecourses related to games (e.g., Sheldon, 2011) and game-based learning (e.g., Fishman & Aguilar, 2012), butalso in other science and engineering areas (e.g., Barata, Gama, Jorge, & Gonçalves, 2013). Sheldon’s (2011)multiplayer classroom experimentation initiated in 2009, set out a prominent example. The course was designedwith the assumption that students would earn their points by embarking on quests and participating in guilds(collaboration) in order to eventually receive grades above F. The authors and researchers mentioned aboveequivocally argue that simply mapping the game elements to course activities does not necessarily makestudents’ learning gameful. McGonigal (2011) used the term ‘gameful’ to emphasize on the seriousness of gameplay, which may not be captured from the word ‘playful.’ Building on this notion, Holden and colleagues (2014)provide a useful framework in conceptualizing the experience of gameful learning. They suggest three elements,CSCL 2015 Proceedings485© ISLSincluding attitude, identity, and ignorance, as dynamic influences that bring about gamefulness. The activitiesand assessments are not in and of themselves gameful; conversely, gameful learning happens through thelearners’ interactions with them. The element of attitude considers what Suits (2005) calls ‘lusory attitude,’ withwhich players accept rules and constrains of a game and make efforts to achieve its goals. The element ofidentity is also played out by the learners: they negotiate identities in and out of the game and the learningsetting (Holden et al., 2014). The element of ignorance can also be found from Salen’s (2011) account on Questto Learn, where the community of questers (i.e., learners) constantly identifies and embraces its lack ofknowledge and a need to share and provide feedback.MethodsThe course, Digital Game-Based Learning, incorporated some game elements, with the intention that theparticipants would immerse into the concepts and practices of game-based learning. The author designed andinitially taught this course during the summer 2013 two-week residential period for an online Master ofEducation program. In order to foster a community of players, the course design used game concepts, such asexperience points (XPs) and multiple battles for students’ learning tasks (Johnson et al., 2014; Sheldon, 2011).XPs were to be earned in everyday activities during the two-week intensive course. The 3-hour class sessionsallowed the students to collectively develop and articulate design principles for learning and games, informed bytheories and practices. They also participated in the community of designers (teachers) to exchange and developideas. This happened both face-to-face and online using Google+ community page to share, accumulate, andtrace evolving ideas and digital resources (see Figure 1). However, an apparent tension surfaced between theuniversity-credit course evaluation and social practices common in playing games (Kim, 2014). Many game-likeelements were directly associated with assessments (i.e., everyday XPs), and students were not comfortable withsharing the accumulation of those points (i.e., leaderboard), which is a common practice in many social games.Figure 1. Google+ group page for microblogging as avatarsThis paper reports on the second iteration from the two-week intensive course offered in Summer 2014.A new element required students to create their avatars for anonymity and to self-score their XPs for theleaderboard everyday. Another prominent element of games that is often lacking in higher education isimmediate feedback. We reviewed activities daily and reflected on self-scored XPs for selected avatars (e.g.,microblogging on games they reviewed). A researcher took observation notes everyday during the course. Theinstructor took occasional reflective notes and conducted an informal survey about microblogging usingstudents’ avatar identities. The assignments and the electronic artifacts posted online were collected from the 15students out of 17 enrolled students who agreed to share their work (ages between 25 and 55). The aim of thecourse design was to create engagement and a playful culture in a graduate classroom, through which studentsexperience the benefits (and/or pitfalls) of gameful learning activities and assessments. In the following, Ipresent the preliminary findings on one aspect of the course, i.e., microblogging through avatar identities, tounderstand how students worked (or played) with this particular activity in a gameful manner.FindingsThe use of avatars and a self-reported XP leaderboard was an important design change implemented from theprevious course. In a typical university classroom, points or numbers associated with a student’s performanceare private between the instructor and a student, even though each other’s participation and contribution areeasily visible to all students. Adopting game concepts, as XPs and a leaderboard, would inevitably challenge theexiting rules and structure of a graduate course. The self-reporting of XPs as avatars, therefore, was intended toprovide some level of privacy, to eliminate the surprises of finding out their XPs from the instructor, toencourage learners’ agency in their own performances, and to possibly provide an opportunity to express theirCSCL 2015 Proceedings486© ISLSopinions from different perspectives. The instructor conducted an informal online survey at the mid-point of thecourse, to find out whether or not all students were comfortable to reveal their identities on the last day and tohear their thoughts on this practice. All agreed to reveal their avatars. Names mentioned below are eitherpseudonyms or their actual or pseudo avatar screen names depending on participants’ indicated preferences.Gameful learning with the new rules of a graduate courseIn the open-ended question to comment on using avatars, 10 out of 17 students mentioned that they enjoyedfiguring out who the person was. Doc Claw, for example, mentioned, “I thought the avatar thing was a greatidea! It is fun trying to figure out who everybody is just by their comments online.” Interestingly, using avatarsas a protective measure for the XP leaderboard was not much of a concern once they became familiar with theroutine practice. In fact, they showed their ‘lusory attitude’ of accepting this new rule of using avatars, which isdifferent from typical threaded online discussions. At the same time, they engaged in reflective practices inaction (Salen, 2007) in the game of ‘figuring out,’ not only as they read the posts online but also as theyattended to what their classmates discussed in the classroom. At the same time, students made different types ofmoves in their use of avatars. For example, some students found themselves focusing more on ideas rather thanassociating the opinions with particular classmates. James mentioned, “I think that the use of avatars was aninnovated teaching strategy that encouraged me to construct understanding through a more candid and opencommunication and (reducing potential for bias).” Other students, on the other hand, mentioned that they triednot to say something similar in class so that they would not accidently reveal their identities to others. Therewere, of course, few students who did not see the value of logging into a different Google account (or changingtheir names/photos) as they appreciate connecting online posts with face-to-face conversations. Most of thestudents were part of a Master of Education program cohort, and many thought they figured out everyone.However, there was a general element of surprise on the last day when everyone revealed their identities.Gameful learning and identitiesStudents in the course constantly navigated their identities as gamers, non-gamers, teachers, parents, graduatestudents, and so forth, in discussing what they were reading and experiencing and in trying out different gamesonline or during the class time. The names and looks of their avatars did not necessarily affect their own (orprojected) identities, but some made a connection with how they liked to act. Introducing themselves as avatarsmight have given a chance to see themselves as protagonists who embark on a quest as gamers and designers oflearning. Birdie Bee discussed how she related to games, when she introduced herself online in Figure 2. HappyFace also posted on the first day, “Day one. Excited and anxious. I haven’t played video games for about 7years. I have however used a lot of ed. games in the classroom and had a serious look at what they offer incontext to what I need. I’m very curious.”Figure 2. Birdie Bee’s post on introducing herselfStudents’ identities as gamers, past-gamers, or non-gamers played out when microblogging about games theyplayed in relation to each day’s topic. Turbo Snail in his discussion of violent games posted, “As a product ofthese early shooters I personally do not feel they have made me a more violent person and am very curious as towhy these games seem to affect different individuals differently.” He, as an in-service teacher, reflected on hisown identity as a gamer in relation to the day’s reading assignment about violent games.Embracing ignorance in gameful learningStudents seemed to be much more open about their ignorance or critical to what they were reading whenmicroblogging online. On day five, Angel of Life shared 15 game-related acronyms she found while reading anarticle. In response, two other students acknowledged that they had to look up what COTS (commercial off theshelf) stands for, and another questioned why no one asked what CI (collective intelligence) meant during theclass. In fact, some students thought there could be more open communication using avatars. Ms. Pacmanquestioned, “I wonder whether having the avatar made people feel safer when they were posting and enabledCSCL 2015 Proceedings487© ISLSthem to write more freely.” In requiring each team to share their progress everyday, the instructor as an avatar,Bumble Bee, posted their work on behalf of the teams in order not to reveal their membership to particularteams. At the beginning of this process many teams seemed to send their typed up notes for the sake of fulfillinga requirement. This started to change when all the teams had short presentations and clearer needs and value ofsharing and receiving feedback were established in day five. This is similar to the account by Salen (2011) onthe conditions of student learning. The teams identified the aspects of their designs that required particularattention from their peers and sought feedback. Some students started posting their group work using their ownavatars, giving others a clue that they are members of particular groups. At this point, the game of hiding behindan avatar became less important than receiving feedback from peers.Conclusions and implicationsIn the NMC Horizon Report: 2014 Higher Education Edition, games and gamification are highlighted as digitalstrategies, which transcend conventional learning activities and are likely to drive technology-related decisionmaking in higher education in the next two or three years (Johnson et al., 2014). The tensions exist inincorporating structurally different concepts into the university course: even though we position the course as agame, one does not have infinite chances to fail and repeat like a game for a university credit course (Kim,2014). The course redesign described in this paper, using avatars and self-reporting of XPs, was an attempt tonavigate and mitigate such tensions and to explore how to bring about the gamefulness in a graduate levelcourse. The gameful learning practices and creative engagement with avatars came from students who acceptedthe new rules of a graduate course, navigated their identities as gamers, non-gamers, teachers, and students, andembraced and created a need to share their work and learn from one another. The future design iteration maypay more attention to how to facilitate students’ establishing the needs to share as well as accepting and creatingnew rules for the course to better bring about the graduate students’ gamefulness into their learning. Thisresearch provides implications for ways in which we deliver instruction in higher education, especially in thecontext of educating in-service teachers. I again argue that engaging in a course in a gameful manner should bevalued for its authenticity in the context of in-service teacher education: they facilitate learning for young peopleand at the same time, many of them may not identify with young people’s gaming practices. The practiceintroduced in this paper provides a strong connection between the course pedagogy and its content, andpositions the course as an opportunity to deconstruct their current learning, teaching and gaming experiences.ReferencesBarata, G., Gama, S., Jorge, J., & Gonçalves, D. (2013). Engaging engineering students with gamification: Anempirical study. In Games and Virtual Worlds for Serious Applications (VS-GAMES), 2013 5thInternational Conference on (pp. 1–8). IEEE.Fishman, B., & Aguilar, S. (2012). Gaming the class: Using a game-based grading system to get students towork harder... and like It. Poster presented at the Games+Learing+Society Conference 9.0, Universityof Wisconsin- Madison. Madison, WI.Herrington, A., & Herrington, J. (Eds.). (2006). Authentic learning environments in higher education. Hershey,PA: Information Science Pub.Holden, J. I., Kupperman, J., Dorfman, A., Saunders, T., Pratt, A., & MacKay, P. (2014). Gameful learning as away of being. International Journal of Learning Technology, 9(2), 181–201.Johnson, L., Adams Becker, S., Estrada, V., & Freeman, A. (2014). NMC Horizon Report: 2014 HigherEducation Edition. Austin, TX: The New Media Consortium.Kim, B. (2014). A graduate course as a game to learn about digital game-based learning. In A. P. Preciado (Ed.),Proceedings of the IDEAS 2014: Rising to Challenge Conference. Calgary, AB: University of Calgary.McGonigal, J. (2011). Reality is broken: Why games make us better and how they can change the world. NewYork, NY: Penguin Press.Salen, K. (2007). Gaming literacies: A game design study in action. Journal of Educational Multimedia andHypermedia, 16(3), 301–322.Salen, K. (2011). Quest to learn: Developing the school for digital kids. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Sheldon, L. (2011). The multiplayer classroom: Designing coursework as a game. Boston, MA: CengageLearning.Suits, B. (2005). The grasshopper: Games, life and utopia. Peterborough, ON: Broadview Press.Thomas, D., & Brown, J. S. (2011). A new culture of learning: Cultivating the imagination for a world ofconstant change. Lexington, KY: CreateSpace.CSCL 2015 Proceedings488© ISLS