Artefacts Mediating Practices across Time and Space:Sociocultural Studies of Material Conditions forLearning and RememberingKai Hakkarainen, University of Helsinki, kai.hakkarainen@utu.fiBeatrice Ligorio, University of Bari, bealigorio@hotmail.comGiuseppe Ritella, University of Helsinki, gritella@gmail.comHans Christian Arnseth, University of Oslo, h.c.arnseth@iped.uio.noAlfredo Jornet Gil, University of Oslo, a.j.gil@intermedia.uio.noIngeborg Krange, University of Oslo, i.h.krange@iped.uio.noGéraldine Fauville, University of Gothenburg, geraldine.fauville@loven.gu.seAnnika Lantz-Andersson, University of Gothenburg, annika.lantz-andersson@ped.gu.seRoger Säljö, University of Gothenburg, roger.saljo@ped.gu.seMona Lundin, University of Gothenburg, mona.lundin@ped.gu.seÅsa Mäkitalo, University of Gothenburg, asa.makitalo@ped.gu.seErno Lehtinen (discussant), University of Turku, erno.lehtinen@utu.fiAbstract: The theme of this symposium is to explore the material conditions of learningand remembering from a sociocultural perspective. We do this in four different empiricalcontexts. Learning and remembering are understood as meaning-making processes that aredependent on and co-constituted by mediating tools that enable practices to extend across timeand space. Our interests are precisely in what ways the “tools” people employ in these studiesmediate activities of learning and remembering, and how they contribute to the organization ofcollective forms of knowing. We also address how we analyze the specific material features oftools that co-determine the unfolding of the activities.Overall focus and issues addressedThe overall focus of this symposium is to explore the material conditions of learning and remembering from asociocultural perspective. It is nowadays not uncommon to think of learning and remembering in terms of sociomaterially entangled and distributed practices, but this idea, in fact, has been around for quite some time. Thebasic notion in sociocultural studies of the material basis of learning and remembering is mediation, initiallyintroduced by Vygotsky (1997). Vygotsky argued for situated studies of how humans interact with artefacts –technical as well as “psychological” – as they engage in activities and practices. To make his idea of mediationsalient, he used an analogy and argued that psychological tools restructure the capacities of the human mind (i.e.learning, remembering, coordination of actions and perceptions) in ways that are similar to how “technicaltools” transform physical activities. This is the essence of the idea of tool-mediated action.The inclusion of a tool in the behavioral process, thus, reorganizes what Vygotsky (1997, p. 87) refersto as the “instrumental act”. First, it “sets to work a number of new functions connected with the use and controlof the given tool; second, abolishes and makes unnecessary a number of natural processes, whose work is [now]done by the tool; third, it modifies the course and the various aspects (intensity, duration, order, etc.) of allmental processes included in the instrumental act, replacing some functions with others, i.e., it recreates,reconstructs the whole structure of behavior just like a technical tool recreates the entire system of laboroperations.” (Vygotsky, 1997, p. 87)As many scholars have pointed out, the distinction between psychological and technical tools must beunderstood as an analogy, since in a sociocultural tradition the distinction between the material and theideal/conceptual is not accepted. Cultural tools “are simultaneously ideal (conceptual) and material” as Coleargues (1996, p. 117).Based on these ideas as a shared premise, this symposium will first present four empirical studiesconducted in diverse settings. Then the contributors will discuss the situated processes of meaning-making thatare salient in the activities studied, and they will explore how these are contingent on material and conceptualfeatures of tools:CSCL 2015 Proceedings593© ISLS1.2.Precisely in what ways are the “tools” people employ in these studies mediating activities of learning,remembering, and how do they contribute to the organization of collective forms of knowing?What are the specific material features inherent to those activities?Collective contribution to the discussion of these issuesAs a collective enterprise we will explore and discuss the different ways that the notion of mediation is relevantin our studies in order to make salient what could be referred to as the materiality of learning and rememberingin situated activities. It should also be noted that mediating tools may extend or restrict people’s participation,they may serve to support or challenge people’s co-ordination and interaction, they may black-box certainprocesses people engage in, they may function as prosthetic devices that extend people’s agency or as vehiclesfor entering into domains and practices that are entirely new.Significance of each contributionThe contributions to this symposium accordingly share specific interests but they also differ with regard toempirical contexts and the kind of artefacts included in the activity. This will be fruitful for the discussion wewish to promote. In the first paper, by Ritella, Ligorio and Hakkarainen, design students’ collaborative activity(as they engage in creating artefacts in their design project), and their meaning-making process are analyzedthrough the Bakhtinian concept of chronotope. A similar, and yet different, case is presented in the paper byArnseth, Jornet and Krange. The study reported concerns student work on sustainable energy use in the contextof science education. As the authors follow how students engage in meaning-making with discursive and nondiscursive artefacts in multi-modal learning environments, they use the analytical notion of a functional system(John-Steiner, Meehan, & Mahn, 1998). The third contribution, by Fauville, Lantz-Andersson and Säljö,explores students’ meaning-making as they engage with a mediating tool, a so-called carbon footprintcalculator. This tool has been designed for people to conceptualize and understand the complexities of climatechange, and, more specifically, the environmental consequences of their daily activities (travel, shopping, foodintake etc.). Here the notion of psychological tool is drawn on to elaborate on the reflexive nature of engagingwith personal behaviors through the lens of a powerful artifact. The final contribution, by Lundin and Mäkitalo,shares important elements of the third contribution with respect to how the self-generated data from people’severyday life are visualized to facilitate learning to manage one’s own life situation. The tool in this case is usedin hypertension care (a common but invisible condition). The study explores the tensions that this mediating toolcreates in the clinical encounter as patients draw on their own documentation and experience to frame andunderstand their health status.Building space-time frames and shared understanding in a media design taskGiuseppe Ritella, Beatrice Ligorio and Kai HakkarainenThis study is aimed at investigating if and how the building of space-time frames is intertwined with theconstruction of a shared understanding of the task to be accomplished during a media design project course. Theliterature suggests that building a shared understanding of the task is crucial for CSCL (Dillenbourg et al., 2010;Rochelle & Teasley, 1995). Moreover, design tasks are considered as ill-structured or wicked, which requireadditional interpretative efforts for the building of a shared understanding. Nevertheless, we argue that acomprehensive understanding of the relationship between two crucial processes is missing: (a) building a sharedunderstanding of the task and (b) framing the context of learning in space and time. In particular, we analyzestudents’ interaction when the link between negotiation of space-time relations (chronotope) and sharedinterpretation of the collaborative task is explicitly articulated in students’ activity. By looking at such moments,we shed light on the collective interpretation of the task as a holistic sense-making process regarding what thetask is about (including subtasks), and the space-time organization (chronotope) of the activity, as it is mediatedby multiple artifacts created and updated by students throughout the course. We conducted participantobservation at a media design course where students worked in groups of 4-5 to develop a project, held atMetropolia University of Applied Sciences in Helsinki. Students worked in teams of 4-5 participants to developa project. Students had to build a product or a service based on a problem presented by a representative of acompany, who acted as their customer. The course lasted 16 weeks and the students worked together for tenhours per week. Many technological tools such as smart-boards, tablets, and notebooks, were available for them.Groups were free to negotiate and select the tools they considered appropriate at the different stages of thecourse, which gave them a relatively high degree of autonomy in the management of the collaboration. In thisCSCL 2015 Proceedings594© ISLSpaper we will present the analysis of one group, composed by five students coming from different masterprograms. The principal method of data collection of this study was participant observation, involving alsocollection of audio and video records, which allowed documenting multi-level activity processes taking placewhile participants are engaged in technology-mediated learning (Goodwin, 2000). Six weeks were selected forparticipant observation: two weeks at the beginning of the course, two weeks in the middle and two weeks atend of the course. The rationale of this sampling was to follow the development of space-time management inthe different phases of the course. Moreover, the collection of video records was complemented with screenrecords of computer-mediated activity whenever students used a smart board. Furthermore, we had access tomost of the artifacts that students shared during the course. Artifacts and field notes were used as secondarydata. The qualitative methods employed allowed triangulating various aspects of the emergent chronotopes andtheir development. The data analysis was organized in three steps:1) exploration of the data and preliminaryinterpretation; 2) selection and transcription of the data for in-depth qualitative analysis: we selected the clips inwhich (a) students were explicitly discussing their interpretation of the task; (2) the students were referring tospace-time coordinates in their speech; (3) the students were taking decisions implicitly framing the task or thechronotope;3) qualitative video analysis of the 52 selected clips.Finally, two stimulated recall group interviews were conducted in order to gather students´ perspectiveon the investigated phenomena. The interviews were used as secondary data set and analyzed using discourseanalysis (Gee, 2000). The analysis shows that students´ interpretation of the task is a developmental process,interdependent with students’ perception of the space-time relations of the ongoing activity. At the beginning ofthe course, when the task is defined in abstract terms, space-time frames were marginal in students´ discourse.However, already at the third week of the course the time-space frames, become relevant for building a sharedinterpretation of the task. Often students discussed – and changed – their interpretation of the collaborative taskin association with the discussion of the space-time organization of the activity. For example, while discussingthe task and defining subtasks, students referred to time constraints, to the organization of the workspaces, to thetools and resources available in the context. Therefore, both the task and the chronotope appeared to beemergent (and interdependent) features of the learning process. When collaboratively building a sharedunderstanding of the task the chronotope was negotiated as well. Multiple artifacts and tools were used bystudents in this process: a concept map tool was relevant especially in the beginning of the course to create apreliminary shared understanding of the task; a shared dropbox folder was used to collect artifacts that werecreated and updated every week by students and contributed to create shared understanding and coordinateefforts; the slides for the final presentation, which became relevant for creating a shared understanding of thetask in the end of the course. These results show that interpreting the task and organizing the activity in spaceand time are integrated layers of activity strongly “grounded” in the artefacts created and updated by studentsthroughout the course. During the presentation some excerpts of students’ discourse will be illustrated toexemplify how these processes are interrelated.Learning in a material world: Reflection in science education as embodiedpracticeHans Christian Arnseth, Alfredo Jornet Gil and Ingeborg KrangeLearning about sustainable energy use is a very important topic in science education. There exists a range ofeducational resources that support such learning in both formal and informal settings, but these resources areseldom systematically connected to other resources or embedded into curricular trajectories designed forknowledge integration and reflection. As part of a research program concerned with understanding how to betterconnect learning experiences across formal and informal settings, we implemented a technology-rich curriculumthat was designed to facilitate the emergence of coherent conceptual trajectories across activities. In this paper,we analyze video recordings of classroom interaction in an upper-secondary school, and examine how a teacherand a group of 1st year students engage with material objects and digital resources to learn about energytransformation. We are concerned with how interactions between students and their teacher and theirperceptually available world are organized through their exchange of semiotic means (Streeck, Goodwin &LeBaron, 2011). Our analyses focus on how participants orientations to the different material objects and digitalresources, become occasions to reflect on prior experiences and to connect those experiences with the overalltopic of energy. Attending to the embodied nature of these reflection practices, we examine how students andteachers together structure and perceive the world in certain contextually relevant ways.The use of curricular resources such as still pictures or interactive, dynamic visualizations, have alwaysbeen part of education in general, and of science education in particular. Educators can use these kinds ofresources to make abstract concepts and relations between these more coherent and accessible (Edelson, Gordin,CSCL 2015 Proceedings595© ISLS& Pea, 1999; Lee, Linn, Varma, & Liu, 2010). Despite being carefully designed, resources are ambiguous andinference rich. This ambiguity, rather than problematic, can constitute a basis for the emergence anddevelopment of conceptual discussions in collaborative activities (Roschelle, 1992). In the learning sciencesfocus has shifted towards investigating the ways in which resources enable joint activities. For instance,Schwartz (1995) reported that dyads working with graphical representations of scientific issues outperformedindividuals in conceptual performance, and theorized this advantage to be based on the need to build a commonground for mutual understanding. More recently, literature on computer-supported collaborative learning hastaken interest in understanding how interaction is organized so as to lead to uptake sequences, that is, sequencesin which participants take aspects of prior events as having relevance for ongoing activity (Suthers et al., 2010).Such uptakes often involve the enactment of teacher-led reflective practices by means of which conceptual linksacross events are an outcome (Scott, Mortimer, & Ametller, 2011). Although achieving such conceptual links isoften regarded as relying on the participants’ intellectual competences, and on how the latter are mediated bydialogue, recent research taking a semiotic and cultural-historical approach has shown that bodily and perceptualaspects of the organization of interaction also plays an important role (Jornet & Roth, in press). However,research has not yet fully scrutinized the embodied nature of joint reflective practices. In the paper we addressthe following research question:How do students perceive and translate between discursive and non-discursive artefacts in multirepresentational learning environments?We extend the unit of analysis beyond the individual and see learning and sense making as emergingfeatures of social interaction. This extended unit is captured in the notion of a functional system (John-Steiner,Meehan, & Mahn, 1998). According to Luria there are two distinguishing features of functional systems. Thefirst is the presence of a task that is performed by variable mechanisms. The second is the complex compositionof the system itself (Luria, 1932). The teacher provides the directionality for the development of the system, butthere is a mutually constitutive relationship between the changing participation of the students and the changingsystem as a whole. The data were collected as part of a larger project where 24 first year upper secondarystudents worked on concepts of energy transformation using both physical and digital resources. We designed acurricular trajectory distributed over 7 days and spread across a four-week period. Emerging findings suggestthat the teacher is crucial in contextualizing material objects and digital resources that students make use ofwhile solving curricular tasks. The students have problems to see the resource in relevant ways. In this way, theteacher plays a decisive role to help them make significant interpretations of the curricular topic of energytransfer.“I was shocked and embarrassed by the results”: Carbon footprint calculatorsas mediators of tangible information and as resources for knowing andreasoning about emissionsGéraldine Fauville, Annika Lantz-Andersson and Roger SäljöHuman activities over the past century have resulted in a rapid accumulation of carbon dioxide (CO2) in theatmosphere, resulting in changes in the global climate. To deal with the issue of climate change, citizens need togain understanding of their own CO2 emission, also referred to as their carbon footprint (CF) – linked to theirlifestyle activities. However, one of the major difficulties to grasp the abstract concept of CF is that suchemissions are invisible to the human eye. Recently, the emergence of digital technologies has extended therange of concepts we can visualize and manipulate. Representational devices such as carbon footprintcalculators (CFCs) present questions concerning the user’s lifestyle, and by answering the questions, the usersreceive their total CO2 output in kilograms. This raises interesting questions about how CFC mediatesunderstanding and enables altered ways of reasoning about CF.The few studies that have investigated the impact of learning about the personal emission throughCFCs and then analyzed environmental behaviors, display divergent results. On the one hand, for exampleMallett and colleagues (2013) suggest that adult self-confrontation via a CFC promotes guilt, which partiallymediates willingness to support actions for existing pro-environmental groups. On the other hand, Brook (2011)describes how some adults might be less likely to engage in pro-environmental action after receiving negativefeedback from the CFC. Even if the implications of the use of the CFC in instructional settings have not beenthoroughly studied, the results so far cautiously point to the positive impact that use of CFC has in how thestudents are able to link their lifestyle to climate change (e.g. Cordero, Todd & Abellera, 2008). The presentstudy aims at contributing to this field of research by scrutinizing how the visualization of the CFC relates to thestudents’ understanding of their CF and their reasoning about ways to decrease it.CSCL 2015 Proceedings596© ISLSBy grounding the study in a sociocultural perspective on learning (Vygotsky, 1978; Wertsch, 1998;Säljö, 2005), we regard the CFC as a material and psychological tool, which mediates the idea of CF and itsdeterminants in manners that offer possibilities to understand and learn about climate change and about howone’s personal behaviors contribute to carbon emissions. Our empirical study focuses on learning activitiesimplemented to scaffold high school students around the world to understand their CF and to envision local andglobalsolutions.StudentsfirstcalculatetheirCFbyusingaspecificCFC(http://footprint.stanford.edu/footprint.html), and then they discuss different aspects of the climate change issueusing a social media platform (muut.com). Data were collected from the September 2014 session, involving 45classes from 15 countries. In the analysis, we scanned the discussions for comments where students clearlyaddressed potential CF decrease.Preliminary results show that the CFC as an artefact makes discussions possible and the metric systemused offers concrete reference points for understanding emissions both at the personal level and more generally.Thus, this digital tool supports meaning-making by creating new access points to tangible reasoning practicesthat concern CF and environmental impact. These results imply that the use of CFC’s gives the studentsopportunities to enhance their understanding of, and involvement in, the climate change issue.Documentary practices in transformation: Follow-up consultations withpatients and health care staff in hypertension careMona Lundin and Åsa MäkitaloIn current health care reforms, for instance those building on person centred care, new relations between healthcare institutions and their patients have been articulated. It has been argued that patients need to be moreactively involved in managing their own health and take on more responsibilities for their own well-being andtreatment. In recent policy discourse, ‘patients’ are accordingly being reinvented as ‘partners’ in the delivery ofhealth care services (Candlin, 2000; Dunston et al, 2009). This implies that responsibility and agency need to beboth renegotiated and shared between the parties, and trust needs to be established in the new relation.Technologies are suggested as potential solutions to several problems identified when it comes to establishingnew relations and supporting individuals in self-management and treatment. Digital tools are seen as useful andhandy devices for entering and sharing information on a daily basis (on blood pressure, pulse, medicaltreatment, symptoms, physical activity etcetera). The information that is entered may also be stored in databasesthat can be made available for the parties. This implies a new basis for medical consultations and allows for newpatterns of following up treatment. In addition, the information may be aggregated over time and displayed inweb-based graphs (bar, line, pie, area charts etcetera), allowing for visual re-presentation of the individual’shealth status. As such, technologies in person-centred care provide the person with a technologically mediatedversion of him- or herself. Such representations of one’s own health status, allow individuals to distancethemselves and provide a reflexive element in daily life. From a sociocultural and dialogical perspective westudy the reflexive element that mediational means (Wertsch, 2007) like technologies of this kind may providein practices of self-documentation and re-presentation. Engaging with such mediational means on an everydaybasis may have profound implications for identity formation and learning (Vygotsky, 1997) as well as for moralaccountability and responsivity to ‘the other’ (Linell, 2009). At the same time technologies of this kind maycreate tensions for both parties – as clinical practices are extended into peoples’ homes (Winthereik &Langstrup, 2010), responsibilities and obligations will be re-negotiated.Our empirical material consists of 20 follow-up consultations (10 videorecorded, 10 audiorecorded)with hypertension patients and health care staff. Our preliminary analysis of the material features of this system,shows that the way the patients’ data are visualized and displayed graphically on the computer screen during theconsultation provides support for remembering and discussing their everyday life and related health issues. It isalso evident that the consultations were embedded in multiple documentary practices that created tensions in theorganisation of the face-to-face encounter. We will thus highlight how a material-semiotic tool in the form of amobile phone-based system anticipates new relations between patients and health care staff.ReferencesBrook, A. (2011). Ecological footprint feedback: Motivating or discouraging? Social Influence, 6(2), 113–128.Candlin, C. N. (2000). The Cardiff Lecture 2000 - Reinventing the patient/client: New challenges to health carecommunication. Downloaded 2014-11-04 from: http://www.cf.ac.uk/encap/resources/HCRCcandlinlecture.pdf.Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press.CSCL 2015 Proceedings597© ISLSCordero, E. C., Todd, A.M., & Abellera, D. (2008). Climate change education and the ecological footprint.Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 89(6), 865–872.Dillenbourg, P., & Jermann, P. (2010). Technology for classroom orchestration. In M. S. Khine & I. M. Saleh(Eds.) New science of learning (pp. 525-552). New York, NY: Springer.Dunston R, Lee, A, Boud, D, Brodie, P & Chiarella, M. (2009). Co-production and health system reform – fromre-imagining to re-making. The Australian Journal of Public Administration, 68(1), 39-52.Edelson, D., Gordin, D. N., & Pea, R. (1999). Addressing the challenges of inquiry-based learning throughtechnology and curriculum design. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8(3&4), 391-450.Gee, J. P. (2014). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method. Ort: Routledge.Goodwin, C. (2000). Practices of seeing visual analysis: An ethnomethodological approach. In T Van Leeuwen& C. Jewett (Eds.) Handbook of visual analysis, 157-182.John-Steiner, V., Meehan, T. M., & Mahn, H. (1998). A functional systems approach to concept development.Mind, Culture, and Activity, 5(2), 00-00.Jornet, A., & Roth, W-M. (in press). The joint work of connecting multiple (re)presentations in scienceclassrooms. Science Education.Lee, H.-S., Linn, M. C., Varma, K., & Liu, O. L. (2010). How do technology-enhanced inquiry science unitsimpact classroom learning? Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 47(1), 71-90.Linell, P. (2009). Rethinking language, mind and world interactional and contextual theories of human sensemaking. Charlotte, NC: Information Age PublishingSäljö, R. (2010). Learning in a sociocultural perspective. In P. Baker & B. McGaw (Eds.), Internationalencyclopaedia of education (3rd ed.) (pp. 498-502). Amsterdam: Elsevier.Luria, A. R. (1932). The nature of human conflicts: Or emotion, conflict and will. New York, NY: Liveright.Mallett, R. K., Melchiori, K. J., & Strickroth, T. (2013). Self-confrontation via a carbon footprint calculatorincreases guilt and support for a proenvironmental group. Ecopsychology, 5(1), 9–16.Mercer, N., Littleton, K., & Wegerif, R. (2004) Methods for studying the processes of interaction andcollaborative activity in computer-based educational activities. Technology, Pedagogy and Education,13(2), 193-209.Roschelle, J., & Teasley, S. D. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving.,Computer supported collaborative learning, 128, 69-97.Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. Journal of the LearningSciences, 2(3), 235-276.Schwartz, D. L. (1995). The emergence of abstract representations in dyad problem solving. Journal of theLearning Sciences(4), 321-354.Scott, P., Mortimer, E., & Ametller, J. (2011). Pedagogical link-making: A fundamental aspect of teaching andlearning scientific conceptual knowledge. Studies in Science Education, 47, 3–36.Streeck, J., Goodwin, C. & LeBaron, C. (2011). Embodied interaction in the material world: An introduction. InJ. Streeck, C. Goodwin & C. Lebaron (Eds.), Embodied interaction. Language and body in the materialworld. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.Suthers, D. D., Dwyer, N., Medina, R., & Vatrapu, R. (2010). A framework for conceptualizing, representing,and analyzing distributed interaction. Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 5, 5–42.Säljö, R. (2005). Lärande och kulturella redskap. Om lärprocesser och det kollektiva minnet [Learning andcultural tools. On learning processes and the collective memory]. Stockholm: Norstedts.Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.Vygotsky, L. S. (1997). The instrumental method in psychology. In R. W. Rieber & J. Wollock (Eds.), Thecollected works of L. S. Vygotsky (Vol. 3). Problems of the theory and history of psychology (pp. 8589). Ort: Springer.Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.Wertsch, J. V. (2007). Mediation. In H. Daniels, M. Cole & J. V. Wertsch (Eds.), The Cambridge companion toVygotsky (pp. 178-192). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Winthereik, B. & Langstrup, H. (2010). When patients care (too much) for information. In A. Mol, I. Moser & J.Pols (Eds.), Care in practice. On tinkering in clinics, homes and farms. Bielefeld: Transcript Verlag.CSCL 2015 Proceedings598© ISLS