Effects of Perspective-Taking Through Tangible Puppetry inMicroteaching Role-PlayToshio Mochizuki, Senshu University, tmochi@mochi-lab.netTakehiro Wakimoto, Yokohama National University, t-wakimoto@ynu.ac.jpHiroshi Sasaki, Kobe University, sasaki@kobe-u.ac.jpRyoya Hirayama, Senshu University, ne220151@senshu-u.jpHideo Funaoi, Soka University, funaoi@umegumi.netYoshihiko Kubota, Utsunomiya University, kubota@kubota-lab.netHideyuki Suzuki, Ibaraki University, hideyuki@suzuki-lab.netHiroshi Kato, The Open University of Japan, hkato@ouj.ac.jpAbstract: Perspective-taking of a wide variety of pupils or students is fundamental indesigning a dialogic classroom. As a vehicle of perspective-taking, tangible puppetry CSCLcan create a learning environment that reduces the participants' anxiety or apprehensiontoward evaluation and draw out various types of pupils or students, allowing them to learnvarious perspectives. A classroom study revealed that the effect of tangible puppetry role-playremained in the immediate transfer task; the participants could elicit a variety of voices frompossible pupils even in the self-performed role-play, and as well as on their essay. However,the mutual feedback discussions in the third session changed significantly- as similar to thefirst trial. This paper discusses necessary future directions to promote better reflection and todeepen perspective-taking through the tangible puppetry.IntroductionDesigning an effective lesson leveraging dialogic pedagogy is an essential skill for schoolteachers (Mutton,Hagger, & Burn, 2011)—but even for experienced teachers, it is difficult to operationalize in a classroom. In thedialogic classroom, teachers and students address learning tasks, listen to each other, share ideas and consideralternative viewpoints together. Students articulate their ideas freely—without fear of embarrassment overwrong answers— and help each other reach a shared understanding (Alexander, 2008). The teachers need todesign a dialogue to stimulate the students’ thinking and advance their learning and understanding throughstructured and cumulative questioning and discussion, without monologic knowledge transmission. To preparein designing a dialogue which ensures various students’ participation, the teachers need to imagine a widevariety of voices of their students and possible reactions and questions (Bahktin, 1981).Microteaching is one of the ways to practice how to implement dialogic pedagogy in teaching;however, it is not easy to achieve. One of the reasons discussed in the “apprenticeship of observation”framework (Lortie, 1975) is that student teachers and novices experienced monologic teaching as studentsthemselves. However, we argue that there is another difficulty – excessive self-consciousness (Ladrousse, 1989)or evaluation apprehension (Cottrell et al., 1968) during microteaching. The role-play requires (student) teachersto act out young pupils in a realistic way which they may feel difficulty in, creating a tendency to play honeststudents who follow the teacher’s instruction without questioning.The past study discussed that tangible puppetry can serve as a powerful device for allowing people toovercome emotional or interpersonal obstacles in face-to-face role-play, and for eliciting reactions includinginner emotions or unconscious experiences that they have had in a problematic situation (Mochizuki, et al.,2015). Puppetry allows each participant to obtain participant-observer balance by creating a clear separationbetween self (puppeteer) and non-self (puppet) as well as character (puppet) and observer (puppeteer) whileplaying a puppetry story, so that participants can use informal/irregular discourse more in the puppetry than inthe case of normal self-performed role-plays where they rarely used informal/irregular one (Aronoff, 2005).We argued that puppetry can be a catalyst material to elicit and learn more realistic students’ reactions to fosterperspective-taking of a wide variety of students, and developed a tangible puppetry CSCL system to helpmicroteaching role-play in a puppetry format (Mochizuki et al., 2015). The system records the actions andconversations of the participants (hereinafter, the “character”) on top of a transparent table (Figure 1 (a)). InFigure 1, photo (a) shows the system ready to be implemented. Each puppet or prop is attached to a transparentbox with an AR marker on the bottom. Each character can express his or her puppet’s condition by manipulatinga switch to change the color of the LED in the box to either red or blue (Figure 1 (b)). A red LED may representa sleeping/careless student, and blue an attentive/note-taking student. A web camera and microphone under thetable record the puppets’ movements and conversations (i.e., the behavior of the characters), by detecting theCSCL 2017 Proceedings593© ISLSAR markers. After the role-play (Figure 1 (c)), the participants can view the recorded puppetry to inspirereflection (Figure 1 (d)). The webpage displays the role-play in animated form from a bird’s-eye view.The present study aims to examine the effectiveness of puppetry microteaching role-play, especially onperspective-taking. We demonstrated the preliminary evaluation of the CSCL system by comparison with selfperformed role play. This study examines an immediate transfer of perspective-taking training using the systemso that we can discuss further promising ways to nurture the dialogic teaching skills.(a)(b)(c)Figure 1. The CSCL system for tangible puppetry.(d)MethodParticipants and designParticipants were 36 undergraduate students (Female 66.7%) in a private university Japan, studying to becomeelementary school teachers and taking a pedagogy course. Students were randomly assigned to groups of three,forming 12 triads. They each conducted self-performed microteaching role-play or puppetry microteaching for10 minutes. The system described above was used to record the puppetry microteaching, and all the students ineach group were video-recorded during the self-performed microteaching, both which were reviewed before themutual feedback session. This session was conducted in the form of a discussion, lasting for 20 minutes.To examine the effectiveness of perspective taking in the puppetry role-play, each participant enrolledin one puppetry microteaching and two self-performed microteachings; the first and third participants played theteacher in the self-performed role-plays, and the second participant played the teacher in the puppetry role-play.The rest of the participants played the pupil’s role in every session in the same way (i.e., puppetry or selfperformance) as the student teacher. Students playing the pupil’s role were asked to act realistically, as thoughthey were in an actual classroom. Thus, the first session was designed as the pretest, the second as theintervention, and the third as the posttest to examine the immediate transfer of the puppetry microteaching.Each microteaching included a role-play and a reflection. Students would watch a video or ananimation of the role-play for 10 minutes, and hold a discussion for 20 minutes as mutual feedback. Theanimation was provided by the system described above, and all the students in each group were video recordedduring the self-performed role-play session. After watching the video or animation and mutual feedback byreplaying the video/animation, the students wrote a short essay about what they learned through the session.AssessmentAll the microteaching role-plays and mutual feedback discussions were video-recorded and transcribed (exceptfor one first session in a group due to lack of clear voice recording). Adapting Fujie (2000)’s coding scheme forteacher-student discourse (Table 1), we coded all of the utterances in the puppetry and self-performed role-playsto examine how the students performed (κ = .827). This scheme was designed to study how classroom discourseis organized, especially focusing on formal academic utterances versus informal or everyday utterances. Weaimed to identify any differences in role-play discourse that were due to puppet use. We also analyzed thestudent discussions for mutual feedback, adapting slightly modified Rosaen et al. (2008)’s coding scheme(Table 2) in order to examine how the students reflected on their role-playing in both conditions (κ = .723).Furthermore, the students’ essays (except one student’s essay due to lack of data) were coded from theviewpoint that each essay included student-centered viewpoints, or/and images of a variety of possible pupils’presence and reactions in an actual classroom (κ = .866). Two of the authors independently coded all the data,and coding discrepancies were reconciled by mutual agreement.ResultsThe discourse analysis of the microteaching role-play shows that there are various significant associations(Table 3). The categories “Teacher-Informal,” “Teacher-Double barreled,” and “Student-Informal” are found tohave significant increase, and “Student-Formal” decreased significantly in the puppetry. The tendency ofCSCL 2017 Proceedings594© ISLSTable 1: Definition of codes for utterances in the role-play simulation of microteaching (Fujie,2000)UtterancesTeacher-FormalTeacher-InformalTeacher-Double barreledStudent-FormalStudent-InformalStudent-Double barreledDefinitionA teacher’s utterance that follows his/her lesson plan or is academic relatedA teacher’s utterance based on his or her individual experience and reaction to the studentsA teacher’s utterance reflecting the features of both “formal” and “informal” typesA student’s utterance that follows the teacher’s instructions or is academic relatedA student’s utterance based on his or her individual experience and intention (not academic)A student’s utterance reflecting the features of both “formal” and “informal” typesTable 2: Definition of codes for utterances in the mutual feedback discussions (Rosaen et al., 2008)CommentsFocus on Teacher-ManagementFocus on Teacher-InstructionFocus on Teacher-Double barreledFocus on Student-ManagementFocus on Student-InstructionFocus on Student-Double barreledStudent AchievementOtherDefinitionManaging students’ behavior, role in organization for a smooth lesson flowInstructional strategy that facilitates the cognitive and social interaction around thegoals of the lesson; focuses on the teacher’s roleReflecting both “Teacher-Management” and “Teacher-Instruction”; focuses on theteacher’s role or behaviorManaging students’ behavior, organization for a smooth lesson flow; focuses onthe children’s behavior or attitudesInstructional strategy that facilitates the cognitive and social interaction around thegoals of the lesson; focuses on how the students responded to the instructionReflecting both “Student-Management” and “Student-Instruction”; focuses on thestudents’ behavior and their response to the instructionPreservice teacher indicates attention to student learning and achievement orassesses student learningOther comments or utterances to maintain the conversationdiscourse in “Student-Informal” remains significantly in the 3rd session (self-performance), and “StudentDouble barreled” increased significantly, while “Teacher-Informal” and “Teacher-Double barreled” did notdecrease significantly but “Teacher-Formal” decreased significantly. This result indicates that puppetry canallow improvisational role-play that includes a variety of voices from pupils, and the effect remains in the roleplay in the immediate transfer session in self-performance.Analysis of the mutual feedback discussions (Table 4) found that perspectives of the participantstended to return to the similar state as the first session, while we can see a slight increase in “StudentTable 3: Total number of categorized sentences in utterances in the discourse in the microteaching role-play1st (Self)2nd (Puppetry)3rd (Self)Teacher-Formal741 (+)988817(-)Teacher-Informal21 (-)101 (+)48Teacher-Double barreled45 (-)182 (+)108Student-Formal450 (+)436 (-)456Student-Informal98 (-)219 (+)193 (+)Student-Double barreled2643 (-)106 (+)Note: χ2(10) = 168.712, p < .01, Cramer’s V = .128. (+)(-) are the results based on the residual analysis (p < .05).The group which had data missing was excluded.Table 4: Total number of categorized sentences in utterances in the discussion1st (Self)2nd (Puppetry)3rd (Self)Focus on Teacher-Management468331 (-)420 (+)Focus on Teacher-Instruction1131 (+)755 (-)1073 (+)Focus on Teacher-Double barreled37 (+)33 (+)5 (-)Focus on Student-Management90 (-)329 (+)117 (-)Focus on Student-Instruction304340 (+)177 (-)Focus on Student-Double barreled*Student Achievement282035 (+)Note: χ2(10) = 368.277, p < .01, Cramer’s V = .180. (+)(-) are the results based on the residual analysis (p < .05).*Student-Double barreled is merged to Student-Instruction due to few amount of data classified.CSCL 2017 Proceedings595© ISLSTable 5: Total number of categorized essays written after each session1st (Self)2nd (Puppetry)3rd (Self)1. Student-centered viewpoint(s) included3132292. Images of a variety of students’ presence & reactions included62316Note: A Chi-Square test was conducted for each item separately because the item 1 can include the item 2 as a theoreticalconstruct. For the item 1, χ2(2) = .182, n.s.; for the item 2, χ2(2) = 9.73, p < .01. Ryan’s multiple comparison test onproportions showed a significant difference between the first and the second sessions.Achievement” in the third session, even though the self-performance role-play in the third session focused on avariety of students’ reactions. The analysis of the comprehensive essays (Table 5) shows that there is asignificant increase regarding images of a variety of students’ presence and reactions, and no significantdecrease from the second to the third sessions.Discussion and implicationsThis study shows how the use of puppets - as transitional objects that elicit a projection of self (puppeteer) tonon-self (puppet) - elicited a variety of informal discourse that is rarely used in self-performance. Those positiveeffects were also seen in the self-performance when made just after the tangible puppetry. However, the effectswere lost in the mutual feedback discussions in the third session. This suggests that the participants could nottake in the multiple perspectives of possible pupils in the self-performed role-play very well.One possible reason is a lack of diverse perspectives in reflection by the participants; they reviewed therole-plays from a full view (video) or a bird-eye’s view (animation) every time. Although the participants wereable provide mutual feedback with diverse perspectives in the second session, that perspective was lost whenreviewing the role-plays using video/animation, and no other interventions were provided in the third session.One promising intervention would be a first-person view in the video or the animation. This will allow theparticipant to review the role-play from each pupil's perspective, and generate a person-centered learning stanceand perspective-taking (Lindgren, 2012). Further research on fostering a much deeper perspective-taking isnecessary for improving the tangible puppetry CSCL, in order to ensure proper learning through this method.ReferencesAlexander, R. J. (2008). Towards Dialogic Teaching: rethinking classroom talk, Cambridge, UK: Dialogos.Aronoff, M. (2005). Puppetry as a therapeutic medium. In M. Bernier & J. O'Hare (Eds.) Puppetry in educationand therapy (pp. 109–115). Bloomington, Indiana: Authorhouse.Bakhtin, M. (1981). Discourse in the novel. In M. Holquist (Ed.), The dialogic imagination (pp. 259–422).Austin, TX: University of Texas.Cottrell, N., Wack, D., Sekerak, G., & Rittle, R. (1968). Social facilitation of dominant responses by thepresence of an audience and the mere presence of others. Journal of Personality and SocialPsychology, 9(3), 245–250.Fujie, Y. (2000). Children’s In-Class Participation Mixing Academic and Personal Material: Teacher’sInstructional Response. Japanese Journal of Educational Psychology, 48, 21-31 (in Japanese).Ladrousse, G. P. (1989). Role play. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Lindgren, R. (2012). Generating a learning stance through perspective-taking in a virtual environment.Computers in Human Behavior, 28, 1130-1139.Lortie, D. (1975). Schoolteacher: A sociological study. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Mochizuki, T., Wakimoto, T., Sasaki, H., Hirayama, R., Kubota, Y., & Suzuki, H. (2015). Fostering andReflecting on Diverse Perspective-Taking in Role-Play Utilizing Puppets as the Catalyst Materialunder CSCL. In O. Lindwall, et al. (Eds.), Exploring the Material Conditions of Learning – TheComputer Supported Collaborative Learning Conference 2015, Vol.2, 509-513.Mutton, T., Hagger, H., & Burn, K. (2011). Learning to plan, planning to learn: the developing expertise ofbeginning teachers. Teachers and Teaching: theory and practice, 17(4), 399-416.Rosaen, C. L., Lundeberg, M., Cooper, M., Fritzen, A., & Terpstra, M. (2008). Noticing noticing. How doesinvestigation of video records change how teachers reflect on their experiences? Journal of TeacherEducation, 59(4), 347–60.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (B) (Nos. JP26282060,JP26282045, JP26282058, JP15H02937, & JP17H02001) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.CSCL 2017 Proceedings596© ISLS