Children’s Emergent Leadership and Relational Thinkingin Collaborative LearningJingjing Sun, University of Montana, Jingjing.Sun@umontana.eduJulia Jackson, University of Montana, Julia.Jackson@mso.umt.eduMary Burns, University of Montana, Mary.Burns@umconnect.umt.eduRichard C. Anderson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, csrrca@illinois.eduAbstract: Children’s emergent leadership is an important but often ignored component ofpeer-led collaborative learning. Existing research suggests that emergent leadership developswhen children are given the autonomy and space to regulate group dynamics on their own,which often assists the group to achieve better outcomes within the collaborative activities.However, it is less known whether the emergence of child leadership also promotes deeperand more connected reasoning during collaborative learning. This current study, by codingemergent leadership and relational thinking from two sets of small group discussions (25 intotal), revealed that over time, children exhibited more leadership and relational thinking inthe second collaborative discussion than their first one. In addition, intellectual leadershipmoves, rather than organizational leadership moves, were positively related to generation ofrelational thinking. We discuss the implications of the study to help children, particularlyminority children from underserved communities, to developing leadership and relationalthinking through participating in intellectually stimulating collaborative discussions.Keywords: child leadership, relational thinking, collaborative learning, development, CollaborativeReasoningIntroductionUnderstanding how to support productive social interactions in collaborative learning has become moreimportant, as research shows that without productive peer interactions, even groups with good ideas could fail(Barron, 2003). Besides individual self-regulation, Järvelä and Hadwin (2013) pointed out co-regulation andsocial regulation among group members plays a key role for collaborative learning to succeed. Socially-sharedregulation refers to the regulatory strategies that a group utilizes, to coordinate their collective thinking, actions,and emotions, that help the group achieve its goals. Social regulation can be examined from different angles,and emergent leadership is one of them (Miller, Sun, Wu, & Anderson, 2013).Emergent child leadership is defined as a reciprocal social process during which some childrencoordinate, enhance, or guide the behavior of other children (Miller, Sun, Wu, & Anderson, 2013). It is animportant but often ignored component of successful collaborative learning groups. Though limited, researchthat examined children’s emergent leadership in both face-to-face and computer supported learningenvironments has confirmed the benefits of emergent leadership on the productiveness of collaboration (e.g.Yamaguchi, 2004; Cassell, Huffaker, Tversky, & Ferriman, 2006). A microgenetic study of children’s emergentleadership, led by Li and her colleagues (2007), found five commonly occurring leadership moves in children’sdiscussion groups: argument development, topic control, turn management, planning and organizing, andacknowledgement. Based on Li et al.’s study, Mercier (2014) coded children’s emergent leadership intointellectual and organizational categories, and found that individual children tended to primarily use one type ofleadership move instead of both.Previous research on the impact of children’s emergent leadership has primarily focused on howleadership helps the group to achieve better outcomes. For example, research shows that more effectiveleadership moves helps groups produce better solutions to problems (Mercier et al., 2014; Sun, Anderson, Perry,& Lin, in press), and also promotes group members’ positive feelings towards collaboration (Sun et al., inpress). However, there has been limited research examining the impact of leadership on the process ofcollaboration. We know little about whether emergent leadership produces a higher quality of reasoning duringcollaboration, such as relational thinking.Relational thinking, as stated by Holyoak (2012), refers to the individual ability to form coherentschemas through conceptualizing, generating, and manipulating relations between different concepts. Suchability to recognize relations through surface and deep levels often sets the foundation for deep learning tooccur, such as the transference of knowledge and skills, and conceptual change. Previous research that examinesrelational thinking in the classroom shows that teacher scaffolding influences children’s use of relationalCSCL 2017 Proceedings537© ISLSthinking. Lin et al. (2015a) found that when teachers use prompts based on relational thinking, versus lowerlevel prompts such as requesting facts or definitions, students in turn generate more relational thinking.Research has also confirmed that peer relationships, such as individual social status and group level socialsupport, play an important role in students’ increased use of relational thinking (Lin et al, 2015b). Besides thisemerging inquiry on relational thinking in collaborative learning, it is uncertain whether emergent leadership, areciprocal social process and dynamic form of peer interactions and group regulation, could also influencechildren’s development in relational thinking. This study therefore aims to fill in the research gap, by exploringthe relationship between emergent leadership and relational thinking in Collaborative Reasoning discussions.Collaborative Reasoning (CR) is a free-flowing, peer-managed approach to discussion intended tostimulate critical reading and thinking and to be personally engaging (Anderson, Chinn, Waggoner, & Nguyen,1998). Children read stories about controversial issues that cover ethical or practical dilemmas or child-friendlypublic policy or scientific issues. They take positions on a Big Question raised by a story and present reasonsand evidence for and against these positions, with the goal of collaboratively coming up with the best answer tothe Big Question. In a CR discussion, teachers are encouraged to step back and reduce their talk, making moreroom for students to decide when to speak and what to say. Students independently manage the flow of thediscussions for the majority of the time, and teachers occasionally provide scaffolding when it is necessary.MethodsParticipants128 fifth-grade children from six classrooms with a predominant population of African American students fromMidwest America participated in this study. Depending on the school, between 79% and 99% of theparticipating students were registered for free or reduced-priced lunch.ProcedureDuring the intervention, the participant classrooms learned a six-week curriculum about wolf reintroduction andmanagement in collaborative group work. The curriculum includes three packets: ecosystem, economy, andpublic policy. Each packet comprised of readings specific to the topic, and an activity booklet that containedvarious activities and problems that reinforced and expanded the concepts presented in the readings. Studentsrole played as officials in the Wolf Management Agency while learning the curriculum, and had to make aninformed decision on a Big Question about whether or not they should give permission to hire professionalhunters to kill a pack of wolves that posted a threat to a fictional town.The study employed a jigsaw design. Teachers helped split the class into three or four heterogeneousgroups, where each group held an initial Collaborative Reasoning discussion based on their naïve opinionsabout the Big Question (BQ 1). About one third of the groups were videotaped. Groups were then assigned oneof the three topics (ecosystem, economy, or public policy) to become experts on by learning the informationbooklet and completing the activities together. After finishing their expert topic, children were shuffled into newgroups to hold a second Collaborative Reasoning discussion about the same Big Question, but with theirinformed perspectives (BQ 2). All of the second discussions were videotaped. Detailed descriptions of the studycan be found in Ma et al. (2016).Data sources and analysesThe current dataset includes full transcripts of the six groups’ first Collaborative Reasoning discussions (BQ 1),and systematically sampled 6-minute episodes from all of the 19 new groups’ second Collaborative Reasoningdiscussion (BQ 2). In sum there are 25 discussions.Coding for children’s relational thinkingChildren’s relational thinking was examined turn by turn throughout the 25 discussion transcripts using thecoding scheme created in Lin et al. (2015), which included two major categories of 1) logical or causal, and 2)analogical or hypothetical relational thinking. Logical or causal keywords and key phrases included because, if,so and so that, where statements were based upon conclusions. Analogical or hypothetical relational markersincluded keywords and key phrases such as what if, if you were, is like, just like, the same as and so as, whereinferences were made by relating material to hypothetical scenarios. After speaking turns that included thesekeywords and phrases were identified, statements were checked in the context to determine if they truly servedas one of the two relational thinking functions. About 20% of the relational coding was checked by a differentresearcher, and the intercoder agreement percentage was 98% (Cohen’s Kappa = .90).CSCL 2017 Proceedings538© ISLSCoding for emergent leadershipChildren’s leadership moves were initially identified using the coding scheme created by Li and colleagues(2007), which primarily included five categories of argument development, topic control, turn management,planning and organizing, and acknowledgement. Due to the infrequency of acknowledgement (n= 1), wedropped it from the coding results, and kept the rest of the four leadership moves. In the second step of coding,we applied the categorization developed by Mercier, Higgins, & de Costa (2014), and combined argumentdevelopment and topic control into intellectual leadership, and topic control and turn management intoorganizational leadership. About 10% of the leadership coding was checked by a second coder, and theintercoder percentage of agreement was 88% (cohen’s kappa = .76).FindingsOverall, there were 2,592 turns from the 25 transcripts, of which 473 (18.25%) speaking turns containedrelational thinking, and 207 (7.99%) showed the use of at least one type of leadership move. To adjust for thevariance in the length of the discussion transcripts, numbers of leadership moves and relational thinking codedwithin each transcript were standardized by dividing the total speaking turns of that transcript.As shown in Figure 1a and Figure 1b, children used more leadership moves, and generated morerelational thinking, in the second Big Question discussion compared to the first one. In both discussions,intellectual leadership moves were positively related to relational thinking (rBQ1 = .16, rBQ2 = .43). This trendcan be seen in the following example where student A made a leadership bid of argument development forstudent B, who compared dogs and wild wolves to support his argument that wolves should be killed.Student A: Why don’t you give us-or a good reason why they should [kill the wolves.]Student B: Because they’re dangerous wild animals. They’re not-they’re not (dogs) like-to the pointwhere you could like take care of them. Mmmmm. You could take care of them, but not like one of yourown like a (a parrot) or something.”Organizational leadership moves, however, negatively correlated with relational thinking (rBQ1 = -.12,rBQ2 = -.53). This is perhaps due to the nature of organizational leadership, where a majority of attempts were totake control of or change the direction of the conversation. Organizational moves were also found to lead tosimple yes and no answers, rather than lengthy explanations, thus may not promote or even inhibit relationalthinking. This can be seen in the following example, where student C tried to summarize the group’s decisionsby asking group members to restate their positions. Though such leading gesure helped everyone to see eachother’s standing, the flow of the discussions was also interrupted.Student C: Yeah but she didn’t say all that. Alright who thinks yes? (Several students raise theirhands.) And no? (Two students raise their hands.)Student D: Sort of…Student E: How about you [pointing to student F]Figure 1a. Correlation between Intellectual Leadership and Relational Thinking in BQ 1 and BQ 2.Figure 1b. Correlation between Organizational Leadership and Relational Thinking in BQ 1 and BQ 2.The initial results can be interpreted that over time, children developed emergent leadership skills andan ability in using relational thinking. In classes where intellectual leadership moves emerged, children werealso more likely to use relational thinking that contains hypothetical, analogical, and causal reasoning. However,in classes where there were many organizational leadership moves, children’s likelihood of using relationalthinking decreased. The initial findings are intriguing, and in order to understand why these two types ofCSCL 2017 Proceedings539© ISLSleadership moves had completely opposite relationships with relational thinking, we are currently under closerexamination of features of these two different types of leadership moves. In order to take advantage of thetemporal information reserved from the transcripts of the collaborative learning process, we will conductsequential analysis in the next step to further explore the immediate and delayed impact of intellectual andorganizational leadership moves on children’s relational thinking. We expect to answer questions such as: If achild requests his or her peers to provide clarification of their thinking, will this immediately trigger relationalthinking from the rest of the group? Does conversation and relational thinking stall following organizationalleadership moves?Conclusions and implicationsFindings from this current research speaks directly to the intertwining nature of children’s social and cognitivedevelopment during collaborative learning. Children’s emergent leadership, including organizational andintellectual leadership, was closely related to their relational thinking. Additionally, the participants in thiscurrent study were primarily minority children from under-served communities with a high poverty rate.Children from such communities often lack the opportunities to work on challenging activities collaboratively.The study shows that Collaborative Reasoning and group work can be an alternative instructional method toprovide intellectually stimulating environments where students naturally develop essential skills such as deeplearning and leadership. Findings from this study, though representing a face-to-face collaborative learningactivity, may also have implications for computer supported collaborative discussions. The initial findingsindicate that to help students further develop relational thinking, tools that help students to plan and organizegroup dynamics at appropriate timing could be particularly beneficial.ReferencesAnderson, R. C, Chinn, C., Waggoner, M., & Nguyen, K. (1998). Intellectually stimulating story discussions. InJ. Osborn & F. Lehr (Eds.), Literacy for all: Issues in teaching and learning (pp. 170-186). New York,NY: Guildford.Barron, B. (2003). When Smart Groups Fail. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307–359. doi:10.1207/S15327809JLS1203_1Cassell, J., Huffaker, D., Tversky, D., & Ferriman, K. (2006). The language of online leadership: gender andyouth engagement on the internet. Developmental Psychology, 42(3), 436–449. doi:10.1037/00121649.42.3.436Holyoak, K. J. (2012). Analogy and relational reasoning. In K. J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.), The Oxfordhandbook of thinking and reasoning (pp. 234-259). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.Järvelä, S. & Hadwin, A. (2013). New frontiers: Regulating learning in CSCL. Educational Psychologist, 48(1),25-39.DOI:10.1080/00461520.2012.74800Li, Y., Anderson, R. C., Nguyen-Jahiel, K., Dong, T., Archodidou, A., Kim, I.-H., … Miller, B. (2007).Emergent Leadership in Children’s Discussion Groups. Cognition and Instruction, 25(1), 75–111.doi:10.1080/07370000709336703Lin, T., Jadallah, M., Anderson, R. C., Baker, A. R., Nguyen-Jahiel, K., Kim, I., … Wu, X. (2015a). Less ismore: Teachers’ influence during peer collaboration. Journal of Educational Psychology, 107(2), 609–629.Lin, T.-J., Anderson, R. C., Jadallah, M., Nguyen-Jahiel, K., Kim, I.-H., Kuo, L.-J., … Li, Y. (2015b). Socialinfluences on children’s development of relational thinking during small-group discussions.Contemporary Educational Psychology, 41, 83–97.Ma, S., Zhang, J., Anderson, R. C., Morris, J., Nguyen-Jahiel, K. T., Miller, B., … Grabow, K. (2016).Children’s Productive Use of Academic Vocabulary. Discourse Processes. Advance onlinepublication. doi:10.1080/0163853X.2016.1166889Mercier, E. M., Higgins, S. E., & Costa, L. (2014). Different leaders: Emergent organizational and intellectualleadership in children’s collaborative learning groups. International Journal of Computer SupportedCollaborative Learning, 397–432. doi:10.1007/s11412-014-9201-zMiller, B., Sun, J., Wu, X. & Anderson, R. C. (2013). Child leaders in collaborative groups. In C. E. HmeloSilver, C. A. Chinn, C. K. K. Chan, & A. O'Donnell (Eds.), The international handbook ofcollaborative Learning (pp. 268-279).. London, UK: Taylor & Francis.Sun, J., Anderson, R. C., Perry, M., & Lin, T.-J. (in press). Emergent leadership in children’s cooperativeproblem solving groups. Cognition and Instruction.CSCL 2017 Proceedings540© ISLS