Student Re-Design of Deprived Neighbourhoods in Minecraft:Community-Driven Urban DevelopmentRikke Magnussen, ResearchLab: ICT and Design for Learning, Department of Communication, AalborgUniversity, Copenhagen, Denmark, rikkem@hum.aau.dkAnna Lindenhoff Elming, Social Services Department, Copenhagen City Council, Copenhagen, Denmark,BS8I@sof.kk.dkAbstract: This paper presents results from the three-year research and development projectCities at Play: Community Drive, where students in five 7th–9th grade classes, in collaborationwith the Copenhagen City Council urban planners, used Minecraft and other digital andphysical tools to redesign their deprived neighbourhood to generate solutions to problems intheir local area. The overall aim was to understand how to integrate community-driven scienceand urban development in school education, in addition to identifying the knowledge andpractices that emerged from the process. Our study presents survey data from two 7th gradeclasses (50 students 13–14 years of age) that developed Minecraft and LEGO models that redesigned their neighbourhood to solve local problems. The results show that, over the courseof the project, students became aware of the authentic knowledge they possess about theirurban area and that they are able to connect it to structural changes.Introduction and backgroundFor the past decade citizen science has been defined as involving laypeople in the production of science outsideformal research institutions, with opportunities to do so growing due to web 2.0 technologies and other types ofdigital platforms (Delfanti, 2010). New digital platforms are changing the way laypeople are involved intechnical and scientific processes and production that affect their lives. Games, for example, have played acentral role in the study and development of platforms for authentic collaboration between laypeople andscientists (Good & Su, 2011).Some major trends in the study and development of learning game formats in the past decade includeexploration of how the game media can facilitate new approaches to authentic science and technical education.Examples of this are games in which players become urban planners, biologists or forensic experts drawing onthe authentic tools, processes and values of specific professions (Shaffer, 2006; Squire & Klopfer, 2007;Magnussen, 2007). The motivation for developing this type of games stems from a critique of the teaching ofstandardised skills to children in today’s school system (Gee, 2003). It is argued that few schools teach studentshow to create knowledge; instead, students are taught that knowledge is static and complete. This means thatthey become experts at consuming rather than producing new knowledge (Sawyer, 2006).Digital platforms that invite students to participate in professional processes bring up the matter ofwhether students learn to work as a scientific expert or whether they learn how to be an expert. The answer maydepend on various design elements of profession simulation games. First, the clients and experts studentscollaborate with in the games are fictional characters with fictional problems that need to be solved to play thegame in school but that do not have relevance in the world outside school. Second, the fictional problems to besolved in these games often follow a linear path and have a clear starting and end point. This is clearly differentfrom real-life professional problem solving, where the processes are more multidimensional. Finally, eventhough these types of games have been shown to support student creation of new process tools (Magnussen,2007), the solutions are often pre-defined and already known by the teachers. This stands in contrast to the reallife open-ended tasks professionals face and that can be carried out in various ways, the chance of success orfailure always an issue to be considered. Scientific discovery games address issues that exist outside a formallearning setting. The main goal of this type of game is to create a platform that motivates players to contribute tosolving scientific problems. Yet the question remains open as to what students learn when they take part inauthentic problem solving processes.Where major trends have involved simulating authentic technical or scientific processes in gameenvironments to encourage student learning about authentic science, scientific discovery games or citizenscience games now focus on gamifying professional research or technical processes, allowing and motivatingplayers to take part in generating results for authentic application in scientific research (Cooper, 2015; Dean etal., 2015).The development of scientific discovery games within the past couple of years introduces newelements into game-based participation in a science classroom setting (Magnussen et al., 2014). The main goalCSCL 2017 Proceedings271© ISLSof this category of games is to create a platform that enables and motivates players to contribute to solvingscientific problems (Cooper et al., 2010). The most well recognised example of this class of games is Foldit,which is an online puzzle game where players participate in folding amino acid chains to form new proteinstructures (Good & Su, 2011). Studies show, however, that integrating games in authentic knowledge creation inscience education can be complex. Previous studies on these types of learning environments (Magnussen et al.,2014) clearly indicate that using game media as a tool for conducting real-life problem solving andcollaboration with real-life experts is potentially highly motivating for science students but can also beperceived as not addressing learning, leaving students feeling confused about the meaningfulness of beinginvolved in a scientific field for which they do not possess the same expert skills as their professional scientificcollaborators. The approach has the potential to introduce real-life problem solving into schools but it must bekept in mind that the initial expertise of students within the area of knowledge development and how thisknowledge develops are a key aspect of community-driven science learning in school.The goal of the City at Play project, where students collaborated with architects on developing modelsin the game Minecraft for redesigning their local urban space, was to further expand the scientific discoverygame concept in an educational context. During our study students gained first-hand experience with creatingnew technical knowledge within the framework of professional architects. This community-driven sciencelearning environment was based on the students’ local knowledge and expertise about their under-privilegedneighbourhood, as well as the theory and methods of the participating urban planners. Our main researchobjective was also to understand how student learning practices and knowledge developed during the City atPlay course.Methods in Cities at PlayThe project Cities at Play described in this paper was developed in close collaboration with the CopenhagenCity Council Social Services Department and ResearchLab: ICT and Design for Learning at Aalborg Universityin Copenhagen. The purpose of Cities at Play was to involve young people in deprived areas as experts in theirown living environments and to educate them on the influence of structural factors on their welfare and wellbeing and in how to use game tools to apply their knowledge and ideas to recreate and strengthen theirneighbourhoods. From the start the project was launched to define problems and introduce game-basedmethodological solutions for developing structural changes in neighbourhoods in deprived areas in Copenhagen,therefore including both social and educational objectives. The project aimed to provide authentic contributionsto City Council urban development and planning as a starting point and, ultimately, in the realisation of some ofthe ideas contributed.The methodology used in developing the components of Cities at Play followed a design-based research processinvolving various design cycles, interventions, analyses and redesign (Brown, 1992). Design-based research wasapplied as a methodological framework and various methods were employed in the development and study ofthe game-based community-driven urban planning environment. The project moved through two iterations in adesign-based research process (Brown, 1992), which included involving an increasing number of school classesand departments in the Copenhagen City Council. The first iteration is described elsewhere (Magnussen &Elming, 2015), hence the focus of this paper is the second iteration, Cities at Play 2.Study design, methods and data analysisCities at Play 2 included four teachers, two 7th grade classes and two 9th grade classes, thus involving 90students aged 13–15 from a school in a deprived area in south Copenhagen, which was chosen as an area due tothe high rate of unemployment and non-existing or low level of education of residents. The school is located inan area with older council housing that suffers problems involving gangs and drugs. A library, kindergartensand a nursing home are in the vicinity of the school. The project was conducted in the local library over a threeweek period. The 7th and 9th grade classes each worked separately for one week on their models and thenworked in parallel during the third week to finish their models for presentation. A mixed method approachwhere conducted where video observations were used to document the three weeks of student design sessionsand focused on documenting the students’ dialogue in the design process in order to understand how the variousmodels were developed based on types of local technical knowledge (Onwuegbuzie & Leech, 2006). Videoobservations specifically focused on documenting the work of the students who were socially weak in schoolbut showed a high degree of motivation for participating in changing their local area.Pre and post-surveys were conducted to register: 1) student motivation for participation in the project,2) local knowledge about their area and urban planning, 3) whether the course supported the 21 st learning skillsReal-world Problem Solving and Collaboration compared to what students defined as “every day school”, 4)what the students viewed as making the course different from “everyday school” and 5) student understandingCSCL 2017 Proceedings272© ISLSof their ability to structurally change their living conditions. The digital surveys contained opportunities toprovide quantitative answers in order to create an overview of the students’ knowledge and experiences, as wellas the opportunity to supply qualitative answers in order to understand the background for the quantitativeanswers (ref survey method). The teachers gave their classes the surveys the day before the course started andon the day the course ended. We also conducted semi-structured qualitative interviews with teachers andstudents that focused on further understanding the possible outcomes and challenges of the project (Kvale,1996). Qualitative data was analysed applying grounded theory as a data categorisation method, where themeswere defined based on participant-defined concepts in perceived knowledge generation and learning practices(Strauss & Corbin, 1998).This paper focuses on analysing the motivation and forms of knowledge in the two 7 th grade classes,which worked on changing their neighbourhood, while the two 9th grade classes worked on changing aneighbourhood they were unfamiliar with. This paper specifically focuses on the 7th grade students’ authenticlocal knowledge and the role it plays in the collaboration with professional urban planners.FindingsThe overall goal was to understand how to integrate community-driven science in school education with a focuson urban development. The research of the current study was to understand what motivation, knowledge andlanguage emerged from the encounter between the principles of professional city changers and students withlocal authentic knowledge about the deprived area they lived in.The design of Cities at Play: Community Drive comprises five phases and is based on experiences andresults from previous studies of game-based innovation education and community-driven science games(Magnussen, 2011; Magnussen et al., 2014). As described in Table 1 the participating students went throughvarious phases that involved finding inspiration, defining the potential and problems in their local area,developing ideas, building models in the game Minecraft and with other materials and presenting with feedbackfrom professional architects and urban planners in various Copenhagen City Council departments.Table 1: Phases in the students’ development process in City at Play 2 (modification of IDEO, 2009)PhasesPhase 1 (Week 1)ActivityInspirationPhase 2 (Week 1)Phase 3 (Week 1)Defining the potential andproblemsDeveloping ideasPhase 4 (Weeks 1 & 2)ModellingPhase 5 (Week 2)PresentationProcessField trips to newly developed areas in the city, introduction tocore concepts in urban planning by architects and urbanplannersDefinition of core strengths and challenges in their local areaDevelopment of ideas for solving local problems andstrengthening its potentialBuilding models in Minecraft, LEGO and other digital andphysical toolsPresentation of models for the head of the Department ofTransport, Technology and Environment and Copenhagen CityCouncil urban plannersMotivation: Identification of local problems and potentialsA primary research objective was to understand what motivated students in the course. In the initial part ofphase 1 urban planners from Copenhagen city council presented students with the overall objective of theirdevelopment work: to redesign their neighborhood to create more life and more connections to other parts of thecity. It is well-known that fundamentally rethinking existing formats is challenging, even for experiencedinnovators and designers (IDEO, 2009). As a result this phase focused on bringing students out of theireveryday setting to inspire them to think about new structural changes. In addition to being presented withprofessional urban architectural methods and theories for changing cities (Gehl, 2010), students participated infield trips to other neighborhoods that had undergone an urban transition. During phase 2, the problemdefinition phase of the four-day development process (see Table 1), students were asked to photo documenttheir area, focusing on its strengths and weaknesses. This process, planned in collaboration with the urbanarchitects, included using a photo mapping method of areas well-known in the field of professional urbanplanning.The two 7th grade classes generally worked extremely intensively during the course of City at Play.When asked “What do you think about the City at Play course?” in the survey, the two 7th grade classes gave aCSCL 2017 Proceedings273© ISLSpositive response overall, with a total of 90% answering either “Excellent” (16%), “Really good” (58%) or“Good” (16%). The reasons behind their motivation were identified in the initial phase of the developmentprocess, where students had to identify the problems and potentials of their local area. In response to thequestion “Would you like to be a part of determining what Folehaven should look like and be like?”, 90%answered “Yes, a little” (14%), “Yes” (31%) or “Yes, very much” (45%). The majority of students were thusmotivated from the very beginning of the project to take part in the redesign of their area. In that regard, findingout what motivated the students to want to take part in changing their area was a central goal. Two additionalexploratory questions were also asked about living in the neighbourhood Folehaven. In response to the first one,“How much do you agree with the statement: Folehaven is fine as it is and does not need to be changed?”, atotal of 65% either slightly disagreed (42%), disagreed (21%) or strongly disagreed (2%) with the statement.The percentage increased to 84% in the post-survey, which presented students with the same statement.When asked why Folehaven was good or bad the majority of the qualitative answers focused on thecriminal activities or feeling unsafe, which is indicated by statements such as: “Too much violence and troublemaking”, “There are many rumours about drugs and stabbings. It’s a little unsafe at the moment” and “There arelots of criminals”. There are, however, also replies that address the more positive social aspects of living inFolehaven, for example: “It depends on who what your personality is like or who you're with” and “Because Ihave some lovely people around me”.These results indicate that the students were highly motivated from the beginning of the project tochange their area and that the overwhelming majority saw problems in their area that they were motivated tochange.Creating models: Real-world problem solving and community-driven urbandevelopmentThe focus of phase 3, the idea phase, and phase 4, the modelling phase (see Table 1) was for students to developideas and game-based models of structural solutions to the problems identified in phase 2. Students were askedto list and draw designs to strengthen identified potentials and solve the identified problems of Folehaven. Thequestions for this task were: “How can you change Folehaven so potentials are strengthened or problems aresolved?” Additionally the development of ideas and later models also (as described above) focused on creatinglife and new connections in the students’ neighbourhood. In phase 4 students selected and developed physicalLEGO models and digital game models. Overall these models were characterised either by an explicit focus onstructurally solving specifically identified problem areas, such as rundown playgrounds, or by being moretheoretical with conceptual plans and examples for changing the social life of or cohesion in Folehaven. Oneexample of the latter type of model was mixed housing designed to lure socioeconomically advantaged familiesand singles or new types of experiences, such as a network of bike paths connecting areas with cafes and playand sports facilities, to create lively areas that would draw visitors from other parts of the city. The differentmodels proved to have a variety of potential in the urban planning activities. The physical LEGO models werewell-suited for creating an initial overview of the developed area. The game tools, on the other hand, allowedstudents to communicate first-hand experience about the area being developed (see Figure 1). The DanishGeodata Agency offers a complete open-source, geographical model of Denmark (http://eng.gst.dk/mapstopography/denmark-in-minecraft/), allowing students to download a 10x10 km area with all existing buildingsand streets to redesign.Figure 1. Students developing models in Minecraft and LEGO.The research focus was to understand what new types of practices and knowledge developed in City atPlay. As a result our study was designed to document whether the students experienced working with 21stCSCL 2017 Proceedings274© ISLSCentury Learning Skills and a more open design intended to document types of knowledge or practices specificto City at Play and community-driven science. As a result the study design also centred on understanding ifstudents felt they were working with the 21st Century Learning Skills Collaboration and Real World ProblemSolving and whether we could detect a difference compared to what students defined as “everyday school”. Thepre-survey contained questions on whether the students experienced collaborating and solving real-worldproblems on a variety of levels in everyday school. They were asked whether more than two people workedtogether when they collaborated, if they made important decisions collaboratively and if the result of groupwork reflects a collaborative process. For real-world problem solving questions were asked whether they feltthey experienced working with real-world problem solving in everyday school or in City at Play. Hence the presurvey asked if they worked with “solving problems for people in the real world outside school” in everydayschool and on what level, in addition to whether this required developing their own ideas or following teacherdefined stepwise processes. The post-survey included the same questions on collaboration and real-worldproblem solving but covered their participation in City at Play instead.Our findings show that no significant difference exists between group work and collaborative practicesin everyday school work versus City at Play, which may be due to how highly integrated group work andcollaboration are in most subjects in primary school in Denmark. Dealing with real-world problems in everydayschool education, however, differed significantly compared to practices in City at Play. At total of 7.5% of thestudents thus either strongly agreed (2.5%) or agreed (5%) that everyday school work often involved “solvingproblems for people in the real world outside school” compared to 76% for City at Play, where they eitherstrongly agreed (23%) or agreed (53%) with this For City at Play, 78% of students that either strongly agreed(26%) or agreed (52%) that they “worked with developing new ideas that they presented to people outsideschool that needed them” while the percentage was 17.5% for everyday school education. These results indicatethat a majority of students experienced working with real-world problem solving practices in City at Playcompared to everyday school education. Student experience with City at Play practices were further examinedbased on the qualitative post-survey questions: “Were the problems you worked with in City at Play differentfrom the problems you normally work with at school?” and “What was different in City at Play compared toeveryday teaching?”. Our analysis of their responses grouped them into a variety of themes that are presented inTable 2.Table 2: Themes that emerged based on responses to the two post-survey questions on City at Play: “Were theproblems you worked with in City at Play different from the problems you normally work with at school?” and“What was different in City at Play compared to everyday teaching?”ThemesChanging thingsSomethingworldinExamples of student responses“Yes, because we normally don’t work with changing things”, “Yes because we wereworking with changing something in our city, which is something we don’t do in class”therealAbout helping people, notjust working for your ownbenefitDecided moreUsing one’s imaginationand inventivenessBeing activeOther toolsCSCL 2017 Proceedings“It was something that could happen in the real world”, “Yes, a lot, because it concerns thereal world and it involved problems we could solve for the entire Folehavenneighbourhood”, “Yes, because in school we do, for instance, grammar and math, while inCity at Play we were supposed to help others make Folehaven a better place to be”, “Yes,because in a way it did not involve problems related to school subjects but something inthe real world”“In school we work more for our own benefit. In City at Play we made something thateverybody could benefit from”, “In school you need to improve your grades, here weneeded to help other people … #Thatwasnew”, “Yes, because we had to consider whetherit would work because here it's all about people”, “Yes, here you can do something for agroup of people and not just do math”, “We helped other people and not just ourselves”,“We had to make something that would benefit other people”“We decided more”, “What we had to make was not predetermined”, “It’s kind of goodbecause we had to decide on what we needed to build and so on. It’s not like that in dailyteaching, where teachers have the right to decide”, “We were allowed to determine/decidemost things”“We had to use our imaginations”, “We don’t usually talk to architects and invent things”“We didn’t sit down all the time”, “You were free to choose what to do”, “We got to movearound and independently decide things, “We were active in City at Play”“We used other tools”, “We had to play a game to do our assignment”, “We were buildingwith LEGO blocks and made models with them”, “No books, a lot of collaboration”275© ISLSDuring our analysis of their responses a variety of themes emerged concerning the project’smethodological and educational approaches, which will be discussed further in the discussion section. A centralaspect of understanding what knowledge the students brought into the project involved gaining anunderstanding of how students viewed their own knowledge about their local area in comparison with the localknowledge that urban planners participating in City at Play had. The pre-survey asked “Do you possessknowledge about Folehaven that the architects redeveloping Folehaven do not have?” In their responses, 9%answered either “Yes, I know a lot that they don’t know” or “Yes, I know a bit more”. This percentage changedto 45% in the post-survey (see figure 2).Figure 2. The bar chart on the left shows the pre-survey results and the bar chart of the right shows the postsurvey results. The pre-survey question was: Do you have knowledge about Folehaven that the architectsredeveloping Folehaven do not have? In the response, 7% (green) answered “Yes, I know a lot that they don’tknow”, 2% (light blue) answered “Yes, I know a bit more”, 26% (orange) answered “Yes, some”, 38% (darkgrey) answered “Maybe a little”, 17% (dark blue) answered “No, not very much” and 10% (light grey) answered“No, not at all”. Students answered a similar question in the post-survey: “Think about the City at Play course:Did you possess knowledge about Folehaven that the architects redeveloping Folehaven did not have?”. A totalof 10% of the students answered “Yes, I knew a lot that they didn’t know”, 35% answered “Yes, I knew quite abit more”, 23% answered “Yes, some”, 16% answered “Maybe a little”, 6% answered “No, not a lot” and 10%answered “No, none at all”.These results indicate that the students’ perception of whether they have knowledge about theirneighbourhood that the professional urban planners do not have changes due to their participation in City atPlay. The study examined this change in their perception of their knowledge or local expertise more closely byasking students to qualitatively specify what specific knowledge they felt they had that the urban planners didnot have. The qualitative part of the pre-survey conducted prior to participating in City at Play provided apicture of the specific local knowledge students believed they had. The majority of the answers to the question“What for instance do you know more about?” covered reasons why the students knew more than the urbanplanners, for example: “I know Folehaven very well because I grew up here, so I'm sure I can work outsomething with some of my friends or alone” and “I grew up in Folehaven and know almost everyone. I thinkmy friends and I can find something good to build here in Folehaven”. The student responses to two post-surveyqualitative questions: “Think about the City at Play course: Did you possess knowledge about Folehaven thatthe architects redeveloping Folehaven did not have?” and “What for instance did you know more about?” can begrouped into four types of knowledge:1) Physical buildings or facilities in the areao E.g. “I know a little about Folehaven and the buildings”, “supermarkets and lighting”2) Experiences or feelingso E.g. “What the atmosphere is like, what’s good and what’s bad, what it’s like in general to behere”, “I can find my way around Folehaven with my eyes closed, I’m part of it”.3) Experiences or feelings concerning locations or facilities in the neighbourhoodo E.g. “That it’s boring to be here/live here. They couldn’t know that there isn’t much light inthe evening, which makes it scary.”, “Where it’s safe and unsafe”, “Safe and unsafe places.What needs to be changed.”CSCL 2017 Proceedings276© ISLS4) Social aspects of the community in the neighbourhoodo E.g. “I know more about the things that some people need.”, “I know, for instance, what it’slike to live here and what most people want /don’t want”.These results indicate that students became more aware of their knowledge about their neighbourhood (figure3). The variety and diversity of the answers to the post-survey show that they also became aware of the differenttypes of knowledge and its value in the development process. The answers concerning the first type ofknowledge, “Physical buildings or facilities in the area”, suggest that students developed an understanding ofhow one’s experiences of an urban area are related to its structural elements and the urban development choicemade in the area (Gehl, 2010). This understanding was further explored in the pre and post-survey, where twomajor issues in City at Play: 1) creating more life in Folehaven and 2) the creation of better connections betweenFolehaven and the rest of Copenhagen, were addressed with, for example, the questions: “Do you have anyideas about how more life can be created?” and “What ideas do you have about how better connections betweenFolehaven and the rest of the city can be created?” In the pre-survey 25% of the students’ qualitative answersdid not contain any ideas or stated that they had not considered any. In the post-survey, however, only 3% saidthey did not have any ideas. Responses concerning the second big issue in the pre-survey addressed moregeneral issues with overall suggestions, such as: “No crime”, “No crime, no drugs. You should be able to feelsafe in Folehaven” and “Things that get people’s attention”. The concrete ideas that appeared in the post-surveyresponses indicated that students had worked intensively with ideas for creating connections and life: “Make acentral hub or make streets, e.g. bike paths, that are a little more interesting so you feel like biking on them”,“Build new apartments so new people move to Folehaven” and “For example, make a blue bike path that wouldhopefully attract people or that would break down the wall around Folehaven”. In addition to suggestingspecific ideas for redesigning the urban area, the students also integrated concepts introduced by the urbanplanners and architects, such as mixing the types of houses and apartments for new groups of people to moveinto, developing connections that would attract people to a central hub by building streets and paths that wouldgive them a better experience. The discussion section will look at the knowledge types in further detail.DiscussionThis paper presented results from the project City at Play: Community Drive, where young people in deprivedareas built models in Minecraft with the aim of redesigning their neighbourhood based on what they define asthe potential and problems in their local area. Game-based community-driven science is a growing field (Cooperet al., 2010; Good & Su, 2011) but more attention needs to be given to understanding what knowledge andlearning processes authentic problem-solving in collaboration with professional partners can lead to in a schoolcontext. The overall research aim of this paper was to understand how to integrate community-driven scienceand urban development in school education, and to identify what knowledge and practices emerge from thisintegration. Data and findings from pre and post-surveys given to the two participating 7th grade classes showedthat various aspects are involved in how students perceive how the approach used in City at Play differs fromtheir everyday school practices. The findings on learning practices showed that students experienced workingwith real-world problem solving more than they did compared to everyday school. Their qualitative responsesclearly demonstrated that problem solving in a context outside school was a central theme, as was focusing onthe community by helping people, i.e. not just doing work for their own benefit, but also being in control oftheir own decision making and problem solving. During our analysis of the knowledge generation part of theabove described practices, it became evident that the participating students’ perception of the knowledge theypossessed changed significantly after the course compared to before. An assessment of the students’ qualitativeanswers regarding what local authentic knowledge they had that the professional urban planners did not haveshowed that it was quite specific and covered, for example, aspects such as buildings, facilities andenvironments. In addition the knowledge categories our analysis identified also showed that after the course thestudents had a better understanding of the physical and structural elements in their local urban space and of theeffect of physical elements such as buildings and lighting. They had realised that all of these various aspectsaffected whether they felt safe or scared, in addition to influencing the broader community in Folehaven. Wealso examined their responses in the post-survey concerning ideas for creating a greater connection to the cityand more life in their neighbourhood. After participating in City at Play the students’ ideas became moredetailed with regard to the specific changes they wanted to implement in the area and incorporated technicalterms related to the principles of professional urban planning. These results indicate that over the course of twoweeks the students developed and changed from defining challenges in their neighbourhood in terms of largerconcepts such as “crime” and “feeling unsafe” to concrete problems such as poor lightning, worn down housing,streets in need of repair and the scattered nature of community activities. These structural, well-definedproblems created a framework for the student to develop redesigns of their neighbourhood, leading toCSCL 2017 Proceedings277© ISLSsuggestions and plans aimed at structural changes to meet different needs and problems of the various types ofresidents. The authentic framework of the models presented to and commented on by real urban planners provedto be highly motivating for both resourceful and less-resourceful students.Overall the above results indicate that over the two-week development process the students were ableto expand their knowledge using their local expertise on their area by combining it and relating their authenticknowledge about the problems and potential of their area to its physical and structural features, but also to theprofessional principles of developing design solutions. Helping other people in the community, solvingproblems in the real world and being in control of their own process and decision making proved to beimportant practices they experienced during the City at Play course compared to everyday schooling.The current study examined a brief two-week period and produced promising results. This paperpresents the first results, but future studies should focus on generating a deeper understanding of the mentionedpractices and types of knowledge. A future research aim is also to do a similar study over an extended period todetermine if the results are similar or different and to look at the long-term effects of this type of communitydriven development when integrated in schools over a longer period.ReferencesBrown, A. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions in classroom settings. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.Dean, D., Guarino, S., Eusebi, L., Keplinger, A., Pavlik, T., Cammarata, A., Murrary, J., McLaughlin, K.,Cheng, J. & Maddern, T., (2015). Lessons learned in game development for crowdsourced softwareformal verification. In: 2015 USENIX Summit on Gaming, Games, and Gamification in SecurityEducation (3GSE‘15).Cooper, S. (2015). Massively Multiplayer Research: Gamifying and (Citizen) Science. In: The Gameful World:Approaches, Issues, Applications. Ed. Steffen P. Walz, Sebastian Deterding. pp. 487-500.Cooper, S., Adrien Treuille, Janos Barbero, Andrew Leaver-Fay, Kathleen Tuite, Firas Khatib, Alex ChoSnyder, Michael Beenen, David Salesin, David Baker, Zoran Popović & Foldit players (2010). Thechallenge of designing scientific discovery games. In: Proceedings of Foundations of Digital Games,FDG 2010, Monterey, CA, SA.Delfanti, A. (2010). Users and peers: From citizen science to P2P science. JCOM: Journal of ScienceCommunication, 9(1), pp. 1-5.Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York:Palgrave/Macmillan.Gehl, J. (2010). Cities for People. Washington - Covelo – London: Island Press.Good, B. M. & Su, A. I. (2011). Games with a scientific purpose. Genome Biol, 12(135), pp. 1 - 3.IDEO.(2009).Humancentereddesigntoolkit(2nded.).Retrievedfromhttp://www.ideo.com/work/item/human-centered-design-toolkit/ 28 May 2015.Kvale, S. (1996). Interviews—An introduction to qualitative research interviewing, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Magnussen, R. (2011). Game-like Technology Innovation Education. International Journal of Virtual andPersonal Learning Environments, 2(2), pp.30-39.Magnussen, R. (2007). Games as a platform for situated science practice. In: de Castell, S., & Jenson, J. (Eds.),Worlds in Play: International Perspectives on Digital Games Research (301–311). NY: Peter Lang.Magnussen, R. & Elming, A. L. (2015). Cities at Play: Children’s redesign of deprived neighborhoods inMinecraft. In: Robin Munkvold and Line Kolås (ed). Proceedings of the 9th European Conference onGame-Based Learning. Steinkjer, Norway. Pp. 331 – 337.Magnussen, R., Hansen, S. D., Planke,T. & Sherson J. F. (2014). Games as a Platform for Student Participationin Authentic Scientific Research. The Electronic Journal of E-learning (EJEL), 12 (3), pp. 258 – 269.Onwuegbuzie, A. J., & Leech, N. L. (2006). Linking research questions to mixed methods dataanalysisprocedures. The Qualitative Report, 11(3), 474–498.Sawyer, R.K. (2006). Educating for innovation. Thinking Skills and Creativity, 1(1), pp. 41-48.Shaffer, D. W., (2006) Epistemic frames for epistemic games. Computers & Education, 46:3, pp. 223-234.Squire, K., & Klopfer, E. (2007). Augmented reality simulations on handheld computers. Journal of theLearning Sciences, 16(3), pp. 371-413.Strauss A. & J. Corbin (1998) Basics of Qualitative Research – Techniques and Procedures for DevelopingGrounded Theory, second edition, London, Sage Publications.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by the Social Services Department at the Copenhagen City Council.CSCL 2017 Proceedings278© ISLS