Enhancing Teacher Education Students’ CollaborativeProblem-Solving and Shared Regulation of LearningPiia Näykki, University of Oulu, Finland, piia.naykki@oulu.fiJohanna Pöysä-Tarhonen, University of Jyväskylä, Finland, johanna.poysa-tarhonen@jyu.fiSanna Järvelä, University of Oulu, Finland, sanna.jarvela@oulu.fiPäivi Häkkinen, University of Jyväskylä, Finland, paivi.m.hakkinen@jyu.fiAbstract: This study aims to explore how collaborative problem solving (CPS) and sociallyshared regulation of learning (SSRL) can be enhanced in practice in a technology-richcollaborative learning context within the domain of mathematics. The participants of thisstudy are first-year teacher education students in two Finnish universities. This paper willelaborate how collaborative problem solving (CPS) and socially shared regulation of learning(SSRL) can be supported by scripting and prompting. It is argued here that we need theorybased pedagogical designs for developing effective collaborative learning practices that aim toprovide students with possibilities to experience the new collaborative, technology-richlearning culture as teachers-to-be.Keywords: collaborative problem-solving, socially shared regulation of learning, teacher educationIntroduction21st century skills, such as skills for collaboration and collaborative problem solving, and an ability to take anactive role in one’s own learning and in the learning of others as well as to make use of technologies in theseareas are highlighted as success factors in modern society (e.g. Griffin, McGaw, & Care, 2012). Teachereducation students have a significant role in acquiring first-hand experiences of novel learning practices tograduate not only with task mastery but also with adequate skills required in the 21st century. However, skillsfor collaborative learning do not occur naturally, and the experiences gained by the students are not alwayspositive (Häkkinen et al., 2010; Näykki et al., 2014). For example, when learners are left alone without anyguidance, they rarely engage in productive and knowledge-generative interactions (Kirschner et al., 2006) andvaried cognitive, motivational, and socio-emotional challenges may emerge (Näykki et al., 2014; Van denBossche et al., 2006). To face these challenges, we need theory-based pedagogical designs for effectivecollaborative learning practices that aim to provide student teachers with opportunities to experience the newcollaborative, inquiry-based and technology-rich learning culture.Albeit collaborative problem solving (CPS) skills (Griffin et al., 2012; Griffin & Gare, 2015) and skillsfor regulation of learning (self-regulated learning, SRL and socially shared regulation of learning, SSRL)(Hadwin, Järvelä, & Miller, 2011) are theoretically characterized as an important part of collaborative learning,little is known about how those skills can be promoted with pedagogical instruments (i.e. scripting, promptingand utilizing technological tools). To rise to these challenges, this study aims to operationalize and combine thenotions of CPS and SSRL theories into practice and to implement a theory-based pedagogical and technologicaldesign to support CPS and SSRL skills development as a part of inquiry-based teacher education practices in themathematics domain.CPS and SSRL skills in collaborative learningProblem solving, in its individual meaning, points to the activity involving problem identification and analysis,problem representation, planning, executing, and monitoring (Hesse et al., 2015). Collaborative problem solving(CPS) (Griffin et al., 2012; Griffin & Gare, 2015) is a specific form of collaboration, where two or more learnersneed to externalize the aforementioned problem solving stages (Hesse et al., 2015). That is, to communicate,exchange and share the identification of parts of the problem, their interpretation of the connections between theparts, relationships between action and effect (rules) and the generalization they propose in search for thesolution (Hesse et al., 2015). In the PISA 2015 study (OEDC, 2013), CPS competency is defined as the capacityof an individual to effectively engage in this joint and shared problem solving activity. In order to reach thecommon goal, CPS requires participants to share their understanding and successfully combine their knowledge,skills and efforts (OECD, 2013). However, CPS does not rely on a uniform skill, but draws on a set of sub-skillsdefined in the ATC21S™ project (Assessment and Teaching of 21st Century Skills; Griffin et al., 2012; Griffin& Gare, 2015). CPS skills consists of five strands of individual and group level capacities under the broad skillCSCL 2015 Proceedings514© ISLSclasses of social and cognitive skills (Hesse et al., 2015). Following Hesse and colleagues (2015), social skills(i.e. participation, perspective taking, social regulation) are about managing participants (including oneself),referring to the “collaborative” part of collaborative problem solving. Cognitive skills (i.e. task regulation,knowledge building), then, are about managing the task, referring to the “problem solving” part of collaborativeproblem solving. These skills do not proceed linearly but may overlap and run parallel between the differentstages of the CPS processHigh-level collaborative learning requires metacognitive, motivational and emotional efforts, which areoperationalized here through the theories of self-regulated learning (SRL) and socially shared regulation oflearning (SSRL) (Hadwin et al., 2011). Regulation (SRL at individual level and SSRL on group level) in groupcontext means that students are engaged in metacognitive monitoring and controlling of motivation, cognition,and behavior – in addition to and as a requisite for task-level activities. Effective regulation processes incollaborative learning require, for example, groups to set goals and standards together, and to jointly monitorand evaluate their progress against these standards (Zimmerman, 1989). Self-regulated learning theory and theconcept of SSRL extend ideas of successful (collaborative) learning beyond cognitive processes and outcomes,acknowledging the interactive roles of motivation, emotion, metacognition, and strategic behavior in successfullearning (Järvelä & Hadwin, 2013). Järvelä and others (2014) summarize the need for supporting thechallenging factors of collaboration in terms of the cognitive level (i.e. task understanding, contentunderstanding, use of learning strategies), motivational level (i.e. goals, interests, beliefs, expectations), andemotional level (i.e. trust, sense of community).CPS and SSRL processes both target the cognitive and metacognitive levels: i.e. problemidentification, problem representation, planning, execution and monitoring (Hesse et al., 2015; Winne &Hadwin, 1998). Furthermore, both theoretical constructs include the social level, as (meta)cognitive functioningis targeted within group interaction. Like SSRL, CPS, at its core, considers students’ academic engagement injoint and shared problem solving activity as an intentional and goal-oriented activity. But even though CPScompetency includes regulation activities and the understanding of the role of students’ engagement insuccessful problem solving (Hesse et al., 2015), CPS seems, to a large extent, to stay in the cognitive domains ofregulation. Also, except for the knowledge building strand of CPS competency, CPS mostly highlights theindividual levels of collaborative problem solving (Griffin et al., 2012). However, SSRL expands on thesecognitive and group-level aspects of regulation and provides broader understanding of motivation and emotionas essential parts of successful collaborative learning processes. The advantages of combining these approacheswithin the same framework make it possible to extend from collaborative problem solving to socially sharedregulation of learning in collaborative problem solving. Furthermore, we expect that more profound and morepermanent CPS and SSRL skills can be enhanced by designing theory-based pedagogical models that enable, inpractice, together with the cognitive and metacognitive aspects of collaborative learning, also motivationalgroup processes to become more visible to the teacher students.CPS and SSRL skills in collaborative learningFollowing Järvelä and others (2014), three design principles are further developed and implemented to supportCPS and SSRL: (1) scripting, (2) prompting, and (3) utilizing technological tools in collaborative learning tasks.The general aim of the design principles is to increase, first, students’ awareness of their own, other groupmembers’ as well as groups’ learning processes. Second, the aim is to support students’ externalization ofsituational cognitive, motivational and emotional interpretations and third, to activate problem solving andregulation skills.Collaborative learning scripts are defined as activity models that aim at enhancing knowledgegenerative activities during collaborative learning (Tchounikine, 2008). In brief, the scripts may vary fromrather coarse-grained macro-scripts (i.e. pedagogical models, such as jigsaw) to more fine-grained micro-scripts(i.e. a model of argumentation) (e.g. Dillenbourg & Hong, 2008). This paper relies on the first approach. In thisregard, we have designed a macro-script, a pedagogical PREP21 model that combines elements of bothCPS/SSRL processes. The structure of the designed model implements the cyclical idea of SRL learningtheories (e.g. Zimmerman, 1989). Starting with orienting and planning whereby groups set goals for theirlearning (forethought phase), followed by strategic learning activities that are constantly monitored andcontrolled (performance phase), and completed by reflection and evaluation (reflection phase). The pedagogicalmodel thus includes the elements of purposeful, intentional, and goal-oriented collaborative activity, alsorecognized as essentials of successful collaborative problem solving processes (Hesse et al., 2015).To activate and to enhance CPS and SSRL skills, specific prompts utilizing iPads will be designed andused as a part of the pedagogical model of PREP21. Prompting is defined here as an instructional method forguiding and supporting students to activate their problem solving and regulation activities while engaged in taskCSCL 2015 Proceedings515© ISLSperformance (Bannert & Reimann, 2012). Such prompts will focus students’ attention on their group members’thoughts and understanding and stimulate cognitive and metacognitive processing. Question prompts will thusinstruct groups to stop and reflect on their thoughts or consider the efficiency of their strategies. It is presumedthat individual and group level awareness is one of the main factors supporting group members to set goals,monitor and control group functioning as well as evaluate groups’ performance and outcomes.MethodsDesign and participantsThe study described here is an ongoing sub-study of a four-year research project that aims to promote futureteachers’ CPS and SSRL skills, and competencies and attitudes towards the use of ICT in teaching and learning.The project includes long-term data collection (during 2014-2016) that combines a quantitative self-reportapproach and a qualitative process-oriented approach. The sub-study here is part of the latter approach. Theparticipants of the sub-study are first-year teacher education students (n=90) from two Finnish universities,following a mathematics course in early spring 2015. The course design implements the ideas of inquiry-basededucation to engage students in authentic, ill-structured and complex problem solving. During the task, thestudents will be working as groups of three to four members. To support the students’ working processes, atheory-based pedagogical model that includes prompts and technological tools will be utilized. Technologicaltools will be implemented for two purposes; firstly, to activate the groups’ CPS and SSRL processes andsecondly, to support the groups’ knowledge co-construction (i.e. through domain specific tools, such asGeoGebra).Procedure and expected outcomesThe focus of this sub-study is on evaluating groups’ learning processes in regard to CPS and SSRL skills (i.e.video observation data) and in terms of their own interpretations of their groups’ learning process. In-depthcontent and interaction analysis will be used for video data in exploring groups’ CPS and SSRL processes indetail. It is assumed to be able to recognize different types of groups in regard to the CPS and SSRL skills andprocesses (differences in terms of quantity and quality of CPS and SSRL). It is also expected to find out howCPS/SSRL processes are activated and sustained; i.e. what kind of interaction triggers the actualization of thespecific processes at group level. The groups’ task products will be evaluated according to task-related,academic requirements and they will be used as an outcome measure of their group learning. By combiningprocess analysis with the outcomes it is possible to find out whether groups with high and low levels ofCPS/SSRL skills and processes also differ in terms of their academic outcomes. Data examples of theimplementation will be presented.ConclusionsThe particular challenge in this study is to combine CSP and SSRL processes within the same theoreticalframework, which aims to extend from collaborative problem solving to socially shared regulation of learning incollaborative problem solving. There are many crossings between CPS and SSRL skills. For example, thecapacity to be a purposeful and engaged learner (as part of a collective) is common to both CPS and SSRL. Inthis regard, we might here also speak in terms of engaging in collaborative problem solving, which aptly relatesto both the cognitive and motivational areas of regulation as well as to strands related to collaborative problemsolving. However, it is apparent that conceptual studies and empirical experimentations are needed tooperationalize and re-define the theoretical construction utilized in the ongoing sub-study described here.ReferencesBannert, M., Reimann, P. (2012). Supporting self-regulated hypermedia learning through prompts. InstructionalScience, 40(1), 193-211.Dillenbourg, P. & Hong, F. (2008). The mechanics of CSCL macro scripts. International Journal of ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, 3(1), 5-23.Griffin, P., McGaw, B., & Care, E. (2012) (Eds.). Assessment and teaching of 21st century skills. New York:Springer.Griffin, P., & Care, E. (2015) (Eds.). Assessment and teaching of 21st century skills. Methods and approach.New York: Springer.CSCL 2015 Proceedings516© ISLSHadwin, A., Järvelä, S., & Miller, M. (2011). Self-regulated, co-regulated and socially shared regulation oflearning. In B. Zimmerman & D. Schunk D (Eds.), Handbook of Self-Regulation of Learning andPerformance (pp. 65-84). New York, NY: Routledge.Hesse, H. Care, E., Buder, J., Sassenberg, J., & Griffin, P. (2015). Framework for teachable collaborativeproblem solving skills. In P. Griffin & E. Care (Eds.), Assessment and teaching of 21st century skills.Methods and approach (pp. 37-56). New York: Springer.Häkkinen, P., Arvaja, M., Hämäläinen, R., & Pöysä, J. (2010). Scripting computer-supported collaborativelearning: A review of SCORE studies. In B. Ertl (Ed.), E-collaborative knowledge construction:Learning from computer-supported and virtual environments (pp. 180–194). New York, NY: IGIGlobal.Järvelä, S. & Hadwin, A. (2013). New Frontiers: Regulating Learning in CSCL. Educational Psychologist,48(1), 25–39.Järvelä, S., Kirschner, P., Panadero, E., Malmberg, J., Phielix, C., Jaspers, J., Koivuniemi, M. & Järvenoja, H.(2014) Enhancing Socially Shared Regulation in Collaborative Learning Groups: Designing for CSCLRegulation Tools. Educational Technology Research and Development, 63(1), 125-142.Kirschner, P.A., Sweller, J., & Clark, R.E. (2006). Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work: Ananalysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-basedteaching. Educational Psychologist, 41(2), 75–86.Näykki, P., Järvelä, S., Kirschner, P., & Järvenoja, H. (2014). Socio-emotional conflict in collaborative learning– A process-oriented case study in a higher education context. International Journal of EducationalResearch, 68, 1-14.OECD (2013). Draft PISA 2015 collaborative problem solving framework. Retrieved 1st of October 2014 fromhttp://www.oecd.org/pisa/pisaproducts/Draft%20PISA%202015%20Collaborative%20Problem%20Solving%20Framework%20.pdfTchounikine, P. (2008). Operationalizing macro-scripts in CSCL technological settings. International Journal ofComputer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3, 193-233.Van den Bossche, P., Gijselaers, W. H., Segers, M., & Kirschner, P. A. (2006). Social and Cognitive FactorsDriving Teamwork in Collaborative Learning Environments - Team Learning Beliefs and Behaviors.Small Group Research, 37(5), 490-521.Winne, P.H. & Hadwin, A.F. (1998). Studying as self-regulated learning. In D.J. Hacker, J. Dunlosky, & A.C.Graesser (Eds.), Metacognition in Educational Theory and Practice (pp. 277-304). Mahwah NJ:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Zimmerman,B.J. (1989). A social cognitive view of self-regulated academic learning. Journal of EducationalPsychology, 81(3) 329-339.AcknowledgmentsWe thank participating teachers and students. This research is supported by the Academy of Finland (Grant no.273970).CSCL 2015 Proceedings517© ISLS