Exploring the Value of Drawing in Learning and AssessmentShaaron Ainsworth (chair), University of Nottingham, shaaron.ainsworth@nottingham.ac.ukMike Stieff, University of Illinois at Chicago, mstieff@uic.eduDane DeSutter, University of Illinois at Chicago, ddesut2@uic.eduRussell Tytler, Deakin University, russell.tytler@deakin.edu.au,Vaughan Prain, La Trobe University, V.Prain@latrobe.edu.auDimitrios Panagiotopoulos, University of Nottingham, ttxdp17@nottingham.ac.ukPeter Wigmore, University of Nottingham, peter.wigmore@nottingham.ac.ukWouter van Joolingen, Utrecht University, w.r.vanjoolingen@uu.nlDewi Heijnes, Utrecht University, dewiheijnes@gmail.comFrank Leenaars, Utrecht University, f.a.j.leenaars@uu.nlSadhana Puntambekar (discussant), University of Wisconsin-Madison, puntambekar@education.wisc.eduAbstract: Drawing is increasingly recognized as a literacy of science. It is claimed thatwhen learners draw they engage in ways that help them evaluate and transform theirunderstanding, practice fundamental disciplinary practices and provides the basis forformative or summative assessment. This symposium draws together research onstudent drawing across different disciplines (e.g. Chemistry, Biology, and Anatomy)to explore the value that drawing can have in learning science and medicine.Importantly, the papers take a nuanced view of the value of drawing; attempting toavoid the sometimes overblown claims that accompany calls for particular approaches toeducation by addressing situations when drawing has been found to be ineffective aswell as helpful. They will also focus on analysis of process data (e.g. drawings) toprovide insight into when particular representational practices are helpful and howthey must be executed and supported to gain these benefits.IntroductionIt is well accepted that a range of disciplinary practices underpins a working understanding of scientificknowledge. We argue with others (e.g. Ainsworth, Prain & Tytler, 2011; Lemke, 2004) that drawingis an important disciplinary practice in science and medicine. Drawing plays a number of importantroles as scientists work and as students learn. For example, analyses of the processes involved inscience discovery has shown that scientists draw to transform their understanding (Gooding, 2004).Epistemic practices in the sciences entail reasoning about relationships between multiple, multi-modalrepresentations including drawings, material instruments and phenomena (Nersessian, 2008). Studentsneed to learn how to reason through visual, linguistic and mathematical modes to generate, coordinateand critique evidence and this often involves models and model- based justification (Lehrer & Schauble,2006). Drawing can support communication between colleagues as they participate in the day-to-dayactivities of science (Kozma, Chin, Russell, & Marx, 2000) or in a range of formal or informalassessments (Cooper, Williams, & Underwood, 2015). However, the rationale for including drawingdiffers across disciplines as does the way that drawing activities unfold. Consequently, this symposiumexplores how students in science and medicine use drawing in similar and unique ways.Stieff and DeSutter explore the value of adding drawing activities for promoting learningwhen students engage with dynamic visualizations in chemistry. Students drew up to six times – each timecreating an observation sketch of the simulation and reflective sketch of their new understanding.These students were compared to students who followed the same curriculum but did not draw. Theyfound a small but significant effect of drawing and that students who drew more frequently learnt more.Panagiotopoulos and colleagues explore medical students drawing when they learn anatomy in preclinical dissection classes. They asked beginning students to draw pre and post dissection and comparedthese drawings to third years on clinical placement. Their research suggests that students come withexpectations strongly formed by textbooks and popular culture, especially for familiar organs such asthe heart. Dissection activities, if anything, seemed to destabilize their understanding without replacing itwith anything more correct. However, by the third year their drawings showed an increasedICLS 2016 Proceedings1082© ISLSunderstanding of the overall shape of the heart although this did come at the cost of specific knowledge ofits features. Tytler and Prain present findings from their on-going exploration of the roles of representationconstruction, including drawing, across a range of school science topics. Their work describes howstudents use drawing in diverse ways to support their learning and reasoning. Moreover, by comparingthe situations where drawing was found to be helpful to those where it was not, they provide guidance forhow to use drawing in the classroom. Van Joolingen et al describe an innovative approach to modeling inscience. Students created an executable model to express their understanding of scientific phenomenon.However, rather than using complex algebraic expression or artificial graphical formulisms they simplydraw the model in a microworld, which the system interprets and animates according to the behaviourdescribed in the model. This paper presents a study of secondary school students learningevolutionary biology through drawing based modelling and reveals how the design of tools, as well asthe way students were prepared strongly influenced the effectiveness of this approach.These papers share the view that drawing can be valuable but illustrate important differences.They combine experiments, ethnographic study and design-based research to understand drawing inlearning. By presenting these papers together, we address a number of important points. The firstconcerns what these students were drawing: from anatomical structures through simulations, models,experiences and abstractions. Drawing was used in assessment, communication, in classroom and ashomework. Together they illustrate the ways that drawing is used to support the learning of manydifferent aspects of science and medicine and their assessment. This provides the opportunity to considerif there are distinct disciplinary differences in the ways that drawing should be considered. A secondimportant issue raised is how drawings should be analyzed and what information we need beyond thedrawing to analyze the approach. Stieff and DeSutter count the number of drawings and relate themto test scores whereas van Joolingen et al explore the talk around the drawings, Panagiotopoulos et alanalyze 10 distinct aspects of each drawing and Tytler and Prain capture video data of the process ofdrawing to learn in classrooms. Understanding that drawing is an authentic practice in many domains hasonly recently been widely accepted in the learning sciences and as a result compared to such practicesas argumentation and writing, we do not yet have much knowledge about how to study and code theprocess of drawing and the drawings that result. All participants will make their approach explicit so thatwith the help of the discussant and audience we can improve our knowledge. Another issue that allparticipants’ address is to consider when drawing or approaches to drawing are not helpful. The pathof over-excited claims about the benefits of an approach to learning followed by a retrenchment as theevidence does not support those claims is a familiar one. By focusing on the situations when drawing hasnot been shown to be effective we hope to avoid this path and make our approaches more nuanced fromthe beginning. Our discussant Puntambekar will contrast these four perspectives to help a s a c h i e v e abetter position to appreciate the costs and benefits involved in using drawing in learning and assessment,as well the challenges for researchers to understand these activities and how best to enact them.Drawing from dynamic visualizationsMike Stieff and Dane DeSutterRecent reviews regarding drawing to learn (Van Meter & Firetto, 2013; Waldrip & Prain, 2012) havereported few studies that investigate the efficacy of drawing activities in STEM classrooms, and the resultsof these studies have been varied. Such work suggests that drawing can be beneficial for science learning,but empirical studies demonstrating when drawing supports STEM learning and how to capitalize on thebenefits of drawing remain outstanding. Notwithstanding the limited evidence, recent innovations forteaching science have begun to integrate drawing activities more centrally into curricula that includecomplex dynamic visualizations, such as animations and simulations. Dynamic visualizations directlearners’ attention to information that is typically not present in texts or illustrations and the extent towhich drawing activities support, replace, or enhance learning from visualizations is unknown. Moreover,there is some empirical evidence that drawing activities may not effectively support learning fromdynamic visualizations any more than other instructional scaffolds. For example, studies regarding learningin high school chemistry classrooms (Stieff, 2011; Zhang & Linn, 2011) have reported marginal effects ofcoupling drawing with dynamic visualizations compared to activities that do not involve drawing. Morerecently, Zhang and Linn (2013) reported that drawing is no more effective than activities that involveICLS 2016 Proceedings1083© ISLSsimply selecting information presented in a visualization. Here, we report on the results of a large-scaleefficacy study that compared the impact of Connected Chemistry Curriculum (CCC) activities that coupledynamic visualizations with drawing activities to learning activities without visualizations or drawing. 92students (drawing group) completed six one-hour CCC homework activities during their normal course ofinstruction in an undergraduate general chemistry course, and 413 students learned the same contentwithout using the CCC activities (problem solving group). The CCC activities involved students engagingwith a dynamic simulation of molecular behavior to investigate a core disciplinary concept. Studentssketched at least twice while completing a guided inquiry investigation using a CCC simulation. Studentscompleted an observational sketch that represented what they viewed in the simulation; Students thencompleted a reflective sketch that represented their mental model of a novel chemical system aftercompleting the activity (Figure 1). Activities were administered approximately every three weeks over afour-month period and completed individually. Participants in the problem-solving group completed analgorithmic problem solving worksheet related to the six concepts targeted by the CCC activities.Figure 1. An observational (LHS) and reflective sketch (RHS). The activity moves from observationalsketches of a closed gaseous system to reflective sketches of an unknown gas under two conditions.Learning outcomes were assessed with a 22-item fixed-choice achievement assessmentdeveloped by the ACS (American Chemical Society, 2001) that students completed on the first and lastday of instruction. Learning outcomes were analyzed using repeated-measures ANOVA with collegeGPA included as a covariate. The analysis revealed a significant difference between groups (F(1, 500) =4.89, p = .027, hp2 = .01) with students in the drawing group (M = 9.87, SD = 5.8) slightly outperformingstudents in the problem solving group (M = 9.24, SD = 2.7). To isolate the contribution of sketchingactivities to learning in the drawing group, we performed a parametric linear regression in theBayesian framework. We chose a non-informative prior distribution, given no prior knowledge of thetrue parameter values in the regression model. A Monte Carlo Markov Chain sampled from theposterior parameter densities over 20,000 iterations, pared down by preset burn in (2,000) and trim(5). Posterior density estimates of regression parameters at the 50% confidence interval indicate thatparticipant pretest scores (βzPreScore: [0.509, 0.618]), institutional grade point average (βzGPA: [0.087,0.205]), and the number of times they engaged in drawing activities (βzDrawing_opps: [0.063, 0.178])were all positively associated with posttest scores. Similar results were found on a subset of posttestconceptual items that explicitly invoked submicroscopic representations: posttest scores were positivelyassociated with pretest score (βzPreScore: [0.444, 0.561]), GPA (βzGPA: [0.043, 0.172]), and the numberof completed drawing opportunities (βzDrawings: [0.013, 0.139]).Consistent with early studies, this study shows that sketching may not yield a large, positiveimpact on learning in STEM disciplines, particularly when coupled with dynamic visualizations. Whilewe did find that students who completed a general chemistry college course using CCC materials slightlyoutperformed students in the comparison group on a learning outcome measure, our analysis indicatesthat this difference was only weakly related to completing the sketching activities themselves. Althoughwe did not find a large benefit of sketching for improving STEM learning in the present study, webelieve additional studies of sketching as a learning scaffold are needed. The optimal design of asketching activity remains poorly understood, but at the least our work has shown that simply producingsketches while viewing a dynamic visualization can marginally improve learning outcomes.Drawing within experimental exploration as part of core epistemologicaland epistemic practices in scienceRussell Tytler and Vaughan PrainICLS 2016 Proceedings1084© ISLSThis presentation explores drawing in the context of a guided inquiry approach to teaching and learningscience where students engage in g u i ded representational challenges to explore the attributes of, andmake claims about, phenomena. In this approach, constructing representations in general, includingdrawing in particular, operates in tandem with experimental processes to productively constrain reasonedexploration and explanations of material phenomena (Prain & Tytler, 2012). We argue that theepistemological processes central to this representation construction inquiry approach mirror epistemicpractices in science. This approach encourages experimenting with and integrating visual as well asmore traditional text-based literacies. Our perspective follows pragmatist accounts of the situated andcontextual nature of problem-solving and knowledge generation and so we describe an empirical andsystematic method of inquiry that involves a collective analysis of explanatory accounts of phenomena toestablish reasoned knowledge, avoiding a priori judgments. Representations actively mediate and shapereasoning such that classroom activities focus on the representational resources used to instantiatescientific concepts and practices. In traditional accounts, representations are often cast as efficient andeffective ways to introduce and illustrate abstracted concepts that are conceived of as distinguishable fromthe representations through which they are generated and communicated. From our perspective however,representations including drawing are the reasoning tools through which we imagine, visualise spatialrelations and model astronomical phenomena. This view is also fundamentally Vygotskian, characterisingrepresentations as the disciplinary language tools that mediate thinking and knowing (Moje, 2007).We will present ethnographic analyses of video sequences where groups of students respond to anopen task by exploration, drawing, and talking to reason about phenomena. Our aim is to investigate a) thevariety of ways that drawing operates to support reasoning and learning, b) the conditions whendrawing is effective in promoting quality learning. As part of the analysis we investigate counterexamples where drawing does not substantially contribute to the learning and the features of tasksincluding teacher framing and support that are important to ensure drawing contributes to learning inways consistent with epistemological opportunities and practices in scientific drawing. We report on twotypes of study, each involving video capture of primary students’ interaction with objects in groups, todraw and otherwise represent their reasoning to problem-solve and explain:1.classroom situations where teachers are developing the representation construction approach andstudents are engaged in representational challenges as part of coherent sequences in topics ofastronomy, invertebrate studies, and consumer science.2.single lessons in a specially designed learning classroom with 10 wall and ceiling mounted videocameras with zoom and tilt capacity, and radio microphones on each desk, controlled from a roomwith visual access. Single lessons were conducted for the topics of levers, flower classification,toys, and astronomy.Analysis was ethnographic with group investigation, drawing and discussion selected to represent avariety of ways in which student drawing supported, or was ineffective in supporting, student reasoningand learning. First, in relation to a) the ways in which drawing contributes to reasoning and learning. 1)representing through drawing was effective in framing/constraining student attention to relevant details ofphenomena, in forcing a focus for instance on details of flower structure, or of toy mechanisms and theirinterrelations 2) drawing acted as a self-check on student perceptions in that errors in perspective orinterpretation were exposed, enabling correction 3) drawing acted as a common ground through whichgroups of students reached agreement about the visuo-spatial aspects of the problem requiring explanation4) drawing exposed visuo-spatial aspects of student conceptions that were accessible to teachers andprovided an opportunity for negotiation of meaning 5) drawing was effective in framing studentobservational and conceptual attention. Second, in relation to b) the conditions under which drawingwas or was not effective, a distinction could be made as to whether drawing was used as a generativepart of the reasoning process, or as an ‘after the event’ communication device. In tasks where studentshad been introduced to appropriate representational resources, drawing could be generative and creative.Where the task was conceptually difficult, without appropriate support, students could revert to ineffectiveabstracted verbal explanations with drawings not adding to their understanding. In cases where studentswere not engaged with the representational task as personally relevant, drawings could be subservient totalk and gesture, and lack explanatory detail. In general, in such cases, explanations were superficial.The study has demonstrated the important role that drawing can play in inquiry approaches toICLS 2016 Proceedings1085© ISLSconceptual learning in science. It revealed the ways in which students generate drawings that are morethan copies of text or board productions to reason and learn. It also identified conditions needed fordrawing to be effective, and the possibility of superficial and ineffective use of drawing if students arenot engaged with the task and do not have appropriate representational resources and supports.Drawing the body: Medical students understanding of internal organsDimitrios Panagiotopoulos, Shaaron Ainsworth, and Peter WigmoreIn the development of the medical practitioner, learning anatomy is considered critical. However, the valueof dissection sessions is more contested with many UK medical schools removing them. Dissection classesoften offer students their first hands on experience with internal structures of the human body and so thosethat argue for them suggest that they support students’ understanding of the 3D organization of the humanbody (Older, 2004). Moreover, prior knowledge that students have for anatomy has been stronglyinfluenced by the representations used in their prior education or found in popular culture. Unfortunately,in the case we will discuss, the human heart, this representation is at best partially complete and frequentlyprofoundly incorrect. In this presentation, we focus on drawings use to assess students’ understanding. Thecurrent approaches to assessment at Nottingham ask students to provide verbal descriptions after eachdissection class and formal assessment is a written online multiple-choice test. This is unfortunate asstudents can produce or recognize appropriate verbal labels (e.g. hydrogen bonding) when their drawingsrevealed profound misunderstandings (e.g. Cooper et al, 2015).At Nottingham the sequence of anatomy teaching activities repeats biweekly. Students learnabout specific structures from a lecture before attending a dissection class, where following a briefing,they conduct a dissection (in small groups) lasting roughly 60 minutes. We asked 1st year medicalstudents to draw the external features of the heart either before (N=44) or after its dissection (N=54).The heart is the second structure dissected. We also attended a clinical placement session and gave 3rdyear medical students the same instructions (N=46). We developed an extensive coding rubric. To analyzespecific features of the heart, the number of features were counted (total = 28) as well as whether theywere correctly shaped, located and labeled. We also analyzed the shape of the heart. We coded theoverall shape of the heart by diving width by height (a human heart in its natural state is about 20% widerthan higher) as well as the point of maximum width (around 60% down in reality) and maximum height(around 40% to the right, so typically drawn 40% to the left in medical textbooks). Representationalchoices were analysed independent of content. 10% of these data were checked (all kappas above .7).Table 1: Drawing analysis results by condition(1) PreDissection(2)PostDissection(3) 3rdyearAccuratelyshaped52.6%(17.7)39.3%(16.9)37.7%(16.3)45.4%(13.9)34.5%(13.3)32.3%(13.8)37.8%(17.9)27.5%(15.3)25.8%(14.0)Accuratelylabeled53.8%(30.3)36.7%(31.4)6.4%(19.4)Overall Shape101.7%(16.6)53.6%(13.5)56.1%(14.8)101.1%(20.6)46.5%(17.0)57.2%(14.8)107.9%(19.4)61.4%(18.5)46.8%(16.0)FeaturesPresentAccuratelylocatedDepth of MaxWidthPoint of MaxHeightANOVA (F,2,144)9.11, p<.001, pη2=.1146.99 , p<.001, pη2=.0907.42, p<.001, pη2=.09533.91, p<.001, pη2=.325)1.83, p=.164, pη2=.02510.0, p<.001, pη2=.1246.65, p=.002, pη2=.086Post hocComparisons1 v 2 = .096, 1 v 3 =.001, 2 v 3 = .0701 v 2=.352, 1 v3=.001, 2 v 3=.0681 v 2=.218, 1 v3=.001, 2 v 3=.0871 v 2=.009, 1 v3=.001, 2 v 3=.0011 v 2=1.00, 1 v3=.386, 2 v 3=.2341 v 2=.113, 1 v3=.082, 2 v 3=.0011 v 2=1.00, 1 v3=.013, 2 v 3=.003Analysis of the features showed a multivariate effect of condition (F(8,278) = 8.24 p<.001, pη2=.192) with all four variables showing a main effect of condition. Tukey tests revealed the same pattern forICLS 2016 Proceedings1086© ISLSall variables: i.e., that before dissection 1 s t years draw hearts which were richer in accurately labeledshaped and located content compared to 3rd years with 1st year post dissection being somewhere in themiddle. Analysis of the overall shape of the heart showed a multivariate effect of condition (F(6,280),= 3.86 p=.001, pη2 =.076). Although there was not a significant improvement in students’ drawings ofthe overall shape, the specifics of this shape did improve with students in third year showing shapeswhich placed the points of maximum width further down (which is more accurate) as well as the pointof maximum height being further to the right, which also is more accurate (all Table 1). Finally, three chisquared analysis considered the representational choices of students. Here there was less of an effect asthere was no difference in how they used color χ2 (4, N = 144) = 1.69, p = ns) or drew in 3d (4(n = 144)= 1.74, p = ns), however third year drawings were on average more “sketch” like and were judgedtherefore as less clear χ2 (4, N=144)=11.03, p=.026).Pre dissectionPost dissectionThird YearFigure 2. Three typical hearts from the different conditions.Our predictions were only somewhat supported. Third years did show greater understanding of theway the heart is shaped but at the expense of remembering specific features. Moreover, students wereno more accurate in their drawings of heart after dissection and in fact they were typically slightly orsignificantly worse depending on the measure. We suggest that dissection for these students (anundeniably affectively demanding part of medical training, especially at the beginning) did destabilizestudents’ reliance of the prior “textbook” knowledge of the heart but did not quickly replace it withsomething more accurate. This study therefore does not unambiguously reveal whether dissection ishelpful or unhelpful; longitudinal studies would be needed. We suggest that this research shows thatdrawing as a mode of assessment in anatomy is of mixed value. It is very helpful for assessing students’understanding of the spatial aspects of internal anatomy, especially shape. However, assessing specificcontent is time consuming and we feel adds little beyond that which could be more swiftly assessed fromwritten texts. Currently, we are conducting grounded interviews with anatomy lecturers where theirevaluation of these drawings will be compared to our assessments.Drawings to create models of evolutionary biologyWouter van Joolingen, Dewi Heijnes and Frank LeenaarsIn computer modeling, students create models of scientific phenomena. Many modeling systems requireskills in either programming or equation writing (Louca & Zacharia, 2011) making modeling lessaccessible to younger students. We have tried to overcome this drawback by using drawings as a basis forthe creation of computational models, and so enhancing \ scientific reasoning in young students. Using adrawing-based modeling tool, students created models of evolutionary biology. The modeling task isloosely based on natural selection of the snail species Cepaea nemoralis. These snails have a shell colorthat matches the background color of the area where they live, which is explained by them being hunted bybirds: snails that are camouflaged are more likely to avoid predation and pass on their genes.Students involved in the current study used SimSketch (Bollen & van Joolingen, 2013) to create theirmodel from a drawing. Elements in the drawing are assigned with user-defined behaviors, which arerepresented as “stickers”. In this case, students draw snails, birds and areas where snails can live.Snails are assigned moving and reproductive behavior, with a probability of mutation of color on eachreproduction. Birds receive a behavior to predate on the snails. The areas serve as background and theprobability of being eaten depends on the color difference between snail and background.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1087© ISLSStudents from grade 7 and 9 worked on the assignment during one class period of fiftyminutes. 15 minutes were spent on introducing the context and explaining the workings of SimSketch, 30on modeling and 5 on discussing what students thought of the experience. Students’ scientific reasoningwas analyzed to determine what elements in the assignment and modeling tool have an influence onscientific reasoning. We used three iterations of data collection, each with a modified version ofSimSketch, based on the results from the previous iteration. Their conversations were analyzed using partof the method for assessing reasoning complexity used by Hogan, Nastasi, and Pressley (1999).Reasoning complexity is used to gauge the quality of students’ learning, which focuses on their ability toexplain and elaborate on their understanding, rather than on comparing their knowledge to that of experts.For each iteration, the main results are described Table 2.Table 2. Overview of the main results of the three iterations in the study.No. Students SimSketch Features andassignments1 4, grade Basic version, three areas for snails7Main findingsReasoningReasons outside the modelare usedGenerally low2More reasoning within themodel, less outside causes.Students with instructionsabout the modeling tool actmore playfully.More complex reasoning36, grade72x6,grade 9+ Hunting behavior modifiable by thelearner.+ 2 instructions 1) focusing on researchquestions, 2) on the modeling tool itselfStatistics tool added.More complex reasoningwhen instructions focusedon the modeling toolA key finding from these iteration is that details in the design of the modeling tool can havesubstantial influence on the reasoning behavior of children. For instance, in the first run, childrenexpressed reasoning that involved “magic” arguments from outside the model:T: What is, you think, the influence of the colors of the areas on the snail shells- on thecolors of the snails? S: They become… darker?T: How so? S: Because the green color influences it or something, or it makes them havedarker children.T: Why would that make them have darker children? S: Because they take up a bit of thepigments or something?T: From the leaves? S: Could be.However, in the second study in which students now explicitly modified the hunting behaviorof the birds typical reasoning:T: How does it choose which snail it hunts? S: On the one that is closest- random.T: Why at random? S: They can also go at the prettiest. But now- If they just pick theone that is closest. That is the most logical, really. That they hunt the one that, that theyare like ‘oh see there is the snail I’ll take that one’. You know, they are not going to flyten kilometers to get him if they have already seen fifty.The third iteration of study contrasted two groups to explore how best to prepare students tomodel to learn. In the first group, emphasis was placed on the research question as students were askedearly on what they thought was going to happen with the colors of the snails and the explaining theworkings of SimSketch was put in second place, whereas, for the second group emphasis was placed onexplaining SimSketch. Students in this second group spoke more about the modeling process inreasoning terms than the first group (a total of 87 utterances versus a total of 36). As expected,students who worked on the modeling task with SimSketch were generally able to create a model ofevolutionary processes and reason about this model. This is a solid foundation to build from and toconsider improvements to the tool design and the nature of instructions to enhance students’reasoning. We conclude that as students display more appropriate reasoning when they are able tomodify the bird’s behavior this indicates there is probably a minimum level of control needed in themodeling processes. By constructing the cause for the hunting behavior themselves, students wereICLS 2016 Proceedings1088© ISLSencouraged to include that in their reasoning about evolution. The result of the third study indicates thatkeeping the modeling task open, by not focusing too much on the research question, actually engagedstudents in deeper and more complex reasoning about the domain. This seems in contrast with earlierstudies in which the modeling tasks were heavily scaffolded (Mulder, Lazonder, & de Jong, 2014). Theirmodels improved with more scaffolding. However, in that study students’ reasoning processes werenot studied. The current study is an indication that too much scaffolding and automation of modelingprocesses may get in the way of learning from the models and modeling processes. This informs thedesign of drawing-based modeling tools, lessons and further study.ReferencesAmerican Chemical Society [ACS]. (2001). General Chemistry Exam (Conceptual). Ames, IA: ACSExams Institute.Ainsworth, S., Prain, V., & Tytler, R. (2011). Drawing to Learn in Science. Science, 333, 1096-1097.Bollen, L., & van Joolingen, W. R. (2013). SimSketch: multiagent simulations based on learner-createdsketches for early science education. IEEE transactions on learning technologies(3), 208-216.Cooper, M. M., Williams, L. C., & Underwood, S. M. (2015). Student Understanding of IntermolecularForces: A Multimodal Study. Journal of Chemical Education. 92(8), 1288-1298Gooding, D. C. (2004). Cognition, construction and culture: Visual theories in the sciences. Journal ofCognition and Culture, 4(3), 551-593.Hogan, K., Nastasi, B. K., & Pressley, M. (1999). Discourse patterns and collaborative scientific reasoningin peer and teacher-guided discussions. Cognition and instruction, 17(4), 379-432.Kozma, R., Chin, E., Russell, J., & Marx, N. (2000). The roles of representations and tools in thechemistry laboratory and their implications for chemistry learning. The Journal of the LearningSciences, 9(2), 105- 143.Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2006). Cultivating model-based reasoning in science education. In K. Sawyer(Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 371-388). Cambridge, MA: CambridgeUniversity Press.Lemke, J. (2004). The literacies of science. In E. W. Saul (Ed.), Crossing borders in literacy and scienceinstruction: Perspectives on theory and practice (pp. 33-47). Newark, DE: International ReadingAssociation and National Science Teachers Association.Louca, L. T., & Zacharia, Z. C. (2011). Modeling-based learning in science education: cognitive,metacognitive, social, material and epistemological contributions. Educational Review, 64, 1–22.Moje, E. B. (2007). Developing socially just subject-matter instruction: A review of the literature ondisciplinary literacy teaching. Review of research in education, 31(1), 1-44.Nersessian, N. (2008). Model-based reasoning in scientific practice. In R. Duschl & R. Grandy (Eds.),Teaching scientific inquiry (pp. 57-79). Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.Mulder, Y. G., Lazonder, A. W., & de Jong, T. (2014). Using heuristic worked examples to promoteinquiry- based learning. Learning and Instruction, 29, 56–64.Older, J. (2004). Anatomy: a must for teaching the next generation. The Surgeon, 2(2), 79-90.Prain, V., & Tytler, R. (2012). Learning through constructing representations in science: A framework ofrepresentational construction affordances. International journal of science education, 34(17),2751-2773.Stieff, M. (2011). Improving representational competence using molecular simulations embedded ininquiry activities. Journal of research in science teaching, 48(10), 1137-1158.Van Meter, P., & Firetto, C. M. (2013). Cognitive model of drawing construction: learning through theconstruction of drawings. In G. Schraw, M. McCrudden, & D. Robinson (Eds.), Learning throughvisual displays (pp. 247-280). Scottsdale, AZ: Information Age Publishing.Waldrip, B. G., & Prain, V. (2012). Learning from and through representations in science. In B. J. Fraser,K. Tobin, & C. J. McRobbie (Eds.), International Handbook of Science Education (2nd ed., pp.145-155). Dordrecht: Springer.Zhang, Z. H., & Linn, M. C. (2011). Can generating representations enhance learning with dynamicvisualizations? Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 48(10), 1177-1198.Zhang, Z. H., & Linn, M. C. (2013). Learning from chemical visualizations: Comparing generation andselection. International Journal of Science Education, 35(13), 2174-2197.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1089© ISLS