The Function of Epistemic Emotions for Complex Reasoning inMathematicsSandra Becker, Reinhard Pekrun, Stefan Ufer, and Elisabeth MeierSandra.Becker@psy.lmu.de, pekrun@lmu.de, ufer@math.lmu.de, Elisabeth.Meier@lmu.deLudwig-Maximilians Universität (LMU), MunichAbstract: This study examined how epistemic emotions, motivational mechanisms, and theireffects are linked during complex reasoning in mathematics. Data were collected from 80university students enrolled in mathematics study programs. Participants first answered a seriesof multiple choice questions regarding knowledge of basic geometry theorems and afterwardssolved a complex proof task. Immediately upon task completion, students reported theirepistemic emotions as well as motivation during the task. Path analyses revealed that epistemicemotions during problem solving predicted the motivation students invested in solving thecomplex reasoning task. Finally, intrinsic motivation positively predicted task performance. Thefindings suggest complex linkages of epistemic emotions with motivational mechanisms duringreasoning and knowledge generating processes and demonstrate the adaptive and maladaptivefunctions of epistemic emotions. Consequently their role for complex reasoning should beconsidered in future research and can guide instructional design to foster reasoning inmathematics.IntroductionIn mathematics, deductive reasoning is one of the fundamental modes in order to generate evidence for or againsta claim or theory, marking mathematics oftentimes as a “cold” science (Sinatra, Broughton, & Lombardi, 2014).However, in order to solve more complex problems and advance scientific discovery in mathematics, reasoningpaths have to be refuted, approaches to solutions have to alter between heuristic and analytical strategies, andcomplex or even contradictory information must be evaluated and at times reconciled. From this perspective,mathematical reasoning is prone to be affected by emotional mechanisms driving epistemic processes (Fischer etal., 2014; Muis et al., 2015). Systematic research examining those links is largely lacking. To address this researchdeficit, we are investigating the role of epistemic emotions for complex scientific reasoning in the domain ofmathematics.Epistemic emotions have been described to relate to the cognitive quality of tasks and informationprocessing (Pekrun & Stephens, 2012), and consequently their object focus is on knowledge and processes ofknowing (Muis et al., 2015). The influence of epistemic emotions on performance and achievement can betheoretically explained by their impact on various variables, including the motivation invested in a learning orproblem solving activity (Pekrun, Goetz, Titz, & Perry, 2002; Pekrun & Perry, 2014). The theoretical frameworkfor epistemic emotions proposes that epistemic emotions can positively affect knowledge-generating activitiesand motivational processes during task engagement. In particular, both positive activating (e.g., curiosity) andnegative activating epistemic emotions (e.g., confusion) have been associated with beneficial effects for learning(e.g., D’Mello, Lehman, Pekrun, & Graesser, 2014). By contrast, the negative deactivating emotion boredom hasbeen found to be detrimental (Tze, Daniels, & Klassen, 2015). However, as compared to cognitive effects (Muiset al., 2015) the role of epistemic emotions for motivational mechanisms during complex reasoning has rarelybeen studied. Consequently, we are investigating if and how epistemic emotions effect complex reasoning inmathematics through motivational mechanisms.We base our exemplary hypotheses on those few empirical findings which have found positive activatingepistemic emotions, such as epistemic curiosity or enjoyment, to consistently motivate exploration (Litman et al.,2005) as well as students engagement (Pekrun et al., 2002) but to also promote intrinsic motivation (Pekrun &Stephens, 2012) during complex reasoning. Boredom, a negative deactivating epistemic emotion, has beenassociated with task disengagement (Tze, Klassen, & Daniels, 2014; D´Mello & Graesser, 2012) and the loweringof intrinsic motivation (Pekrun et al., 2010) and is therefore expected to reduce the intrinsic motivation to solvethe task while it is also expected to have a positive relationship with amotivation. Assuming mediating functionsof motivational variables between epistemic emotions and task performance (Pekrun, 2006), we hypothesize that,in turn, intrinsic motivation should be associated with positive outcomes and consequently will positively predicttask performance while, for example amotivation, should lead to withdrawal from the task and wouldconsequently have a negative effect on task performance.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1018© ISLSMethodSampleA total of 80 University students from a German University (MAge = 22.91, SDAge = 4.54; 45 male (56.3%), 33female (41.3%), 2 missing) participated in the study. All students were enrolled in study programs of mathematics(MSemester = 4.28, SDSemester = 3.07).Materials and measuresMathematical performanceA geometric proof task was developed based on psychological models of knowledge and deductive reasoning(Ufer, Heinze, Reiss, 2009; 2009a). Here, a geometric stimulus has to be investigated by the participant byapplying knowledge of mathematical theorems in order to generate a cohesive proof. A coding scheme wasdeveloped and based on two independent raters their concordance was assessed with Cohen’s Kappa [k] whichranged from 0.74 to 0.96 [M = .83, SD = .11] indicating overall good reliability. Based on these rated variablesthe following measures were agglomerated: 1) the number of arguments logically constructed to formulate theproof (based on premises and conclusions); 2) the number of arguments to which a mathematical justification hadbeen added (i.e., a direct reference to a mathematical theory or axiom); 3) the quality of those arguments. Asnormal distributions were different for each of the three performance measures, z-scores were computed in orderto form an overall performance measure for the constructed proof (1).Prior knowledgePrior knowledge in Geometry was assessed based on a series of multiple choice questions regarding knowledgeof basic geometry theorems before students solved the proof task. One point for each correct answer was given,which resulted in a range of possible scores from 0 to 35 (M = 30.43, SD = 3.72, min. = 15, max. = 35).Epistemic emotionsEpistemic Emotions that students experienced while solving the complex proof task were measured using theshort version of the Epistemic Emotions Scale (EES, Pekrun & Meier, 2011). Each item consisted of a singleword describing one emotion (e.g., curious, surprised, confused, anxious, frustrated, excited, bored) and wereassessed as intensity ratings (1 = not at all to 5 = very strong).Motivational mechanismsA multidimensional measure of the contextual motivation to perform the task was employed based on theSituational Motivation Scale (SIMS; Guay, Vallerand, & Blanchard, 2000). Each of the following constructsbased on four items was assessed: intrinsic motivation, identified motivation, external motivation and amotivation.The intrinsic motivation scale assessed the degree to which a participant reported to having solved the task inorder to experience pleasure or satisfaction inherent in the activity (e.g., “Because I think that this activity isinteresting”). In contrast, the extrinsic motivation scale measured compliance beyond the activity itself (e.g.,“Because it is something that I have to do”). The identified motivation subscale referred to the personal importanceor conscious value individuals experienced when they were engaged in the activity (e.g., “Because I am doing itfor my own good”). Last, the amotivation scale measured to what extent participants saw no sense of purpose orvalue in solving the geometry task (e.g., “There may be good reasons to do this activity, but personally I don´t seeany”). All self-report scales were adjusted to fit the task specific context of geometry (Instruction: “Why [were]you engaged in this [task]?”) and collected via self-report on 5-point Likert Scales (1 = not at all true of me to 5= very true of me) so that a higher score on each scale represents a stronger endorsement of the correspondingconstruct.AnalysisPreliminary analysesPearson product-moment correlations were calculated for all study variables. The epistemic emotions were relatedin the expected directions, for example, positive activating emotions (curiosity and excitement) were positivelycorrelated while boredom, a negative deactivating emotion, showed a strong negative relationship to curiosity aswell as excitement. Further, confusion was substantially related to frustration but both negative activatingICLS 2016 Proceedings1019© ISLSepistemic emotions were unrelated to anxiety. Additionally, confusion was negatively related to excitement andsurprise.Curiosity, for example, was systematically related to all motivational variables and showed a strongpositive relationship with intrinsic as well as identified motivation while the relationship with external motivationand amotivation was strongly negative. A similarly consistent pattern emerged for boredom. While thisdeactivating epistemic emotion was negatively related to intrinsic and identified motivation a strong positiverelationships was found for amotivation.Last, only excitement, frustration and boredom were related to task performance. Prior knowledge wassignificantly related to task performance and consequently included as a covariate in the following analyses.Path analysesPath analyses were conducted to test the mediation model. Hayes and Preacher´s (2013) MEDIATE SPSS macrowas used with manifest variables to account for small sample size. To test significance, the macro usesbootstrapping (generating a sampling distribution of the effects by pretending the sample is a population anddrawing random 10,000 resamples). The Monte Carlo method (Preacher & Selig, 2012) is here applied to estimatepaths coefficients. Prior knowledge was included as a covariate for all variables in the model. Mediation analysistested, while including all variables in one step, whether motivational variables mediated relations betweenepistemic emotions and task performance.The analysis included all epistemic emotions as predictors, all motivational variables as mediators,performance as the outcome variable, and prior knowledge as a covariate. The total effects model was significant.Curiosity and excitement positively predicted intrinsic motivation. Identified motivation was positively predictedby curiosity and negatively predicted by boredom. Although the model for predicting extrinsic motivation reachedsignificance only excitement approached significance as a negative predictor. Last, boredom was a positive andcuriosity a negative predictor for amotivation during the completion of the task. The model that included taskperformance as an outcome variable was significant and was positively predicted by intrinsic motivation and priorknowledge.Lastly, indirect effects revealed that intrinsic motivation experienced during the task mediated therelations between curiosity as well as excitement during problem solving and task performance.Conclusions and implicationsIn order to better understand student reasoning and learning during complex reasoning in mathematics, it is crucialto carefully untangle all components underlying and determining student performance. This study examined therole of epistemic emotions experienced during a complex mathematical task in predicting motivationalmechanisms and consequently task performance. Results revealed that epistemic emotions predicted differentmotivational variables during task performance, while in turn, intrinsic motivation positively predicted taskperformance. Specifically, our findings suggest that positive activating epistemic emotions act as importantdrivers for perseverance during complex reasoning problems and can profoundly impact the quality and outcomesof cognitive processes (Fischer et al., 2014, Pekrun, 2006). On the other hand, our findings additionally indicatethat deactivating emotions may help to explain withdrawal from more complex reasoning tasks. In sum, thesecomplex linkages of epistemic emotions with motivational mechanisms demonstrate the importance forunderstanding the function of epistemic emotions for reasoning and knowledge generating processes and maketheir adaptive and maladaptive effects salient. The findings highlight the need to consider epistemic emotionsalongside motivational variables when conducting research on reasoning and designing classroom instruction.Endnotes(1) All three z-scores were added and then divided by the total number of measures (3) to form an overall indicator of taskperformance.ReferencesD’Mello, S. K., & Graesser, A. C. (2012). Dynamics of affective states during complex learning. Learning andInstruction, 22(2), 145–157.D’Mello, S., Lehman, B., Pekrun, R., & Graesser, A. (2014). Confusion can be beneficial for learning. Learningand Instruction, 29, 153-170.Eccles, J., Wigfield, A., Harold, R. D., & Blumenfeld, P. (1993). Age and gender differences in children's self‐and task perceptions during elementary school. Child development, 64(3), 830-847.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1020© ISLSFischer, F., Kollar, I., Ufer, S., Sodian, B., Hussmann, H., Pekrun, R., ... & Eberle, J. (2014). Scientific reasoningand argumentation: Advancing an interdisciplinary research agenda in education. Frontline LearningResearch, 2(3), 28-45.Guay, F., Vallerand, R. J., & Blanchard, C. (2000). On the assessment of situational intrinsic and extrinsicmotivation: The Situational Motivation Scale (SIMS). Motivation and emotion, 24(3), 175213.handbook of emotions in education, 415-436.Klieme, E., & Rakoczy, K. (2008). Empirische Unterrichtsforschung und Fachdidaktik. Outcome-orientierteMessung und Prozessqualität des Unterrichts. Zeitschrift für Pädagogik, 54(2), 222-237.Litman, J. A., Hutchins, T. L., & Russon, R. K. (2005). Epistemic curiosity, feeling-of-knowing, and exploratorybehaviour. Cognition & Emotion, 19(4), 559–582.Muis, K. R., Pekrun, R., Sinatra, G. M., Azevedo, R., Trevors, G., Meier, E., & Heddy, B. C. (2015). The curiouscase of climate change: Testing a theoretical model of epistemic beliefs, epistemic emotions, andcomplex learning. Learning and Instruction, 39, 168-183.Muis, K. R., Psaradellis, C., Lajoie, S. P., Di Leo, I., & Chevrier, M. (2015). The role of epistemic emotions inmathematics problem solving. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 42, 172-185.Pekrun, R., Goetz, T., Titz, W., & Perry, R. P. (2002). Academic emotions in students' self-regulated learning andachievement: A program of qualitative and quantitative research. Educational Psychologist, 37(2), 91105.Pekrun, R., Goetz, T., Daniels, L.M., Stupnisky, R. H., & Perry, R. P. (2010). Boredom in achievement settings:exploring control-value antecedents and performance outcomes of a neglected emotion. Journal ofEducational Psychology, 102(3), 531–549.Pekrun, R., & Meier, E. (2011). Epistemic Emotion Scales (EES). Unpublished manuscript, Department ofPsychology, University of Munich, Munich, Germany.Pekrun, R., & Stephens, E. J. (2012). Academic emotions. In K. R. Harris, S. Graham, T. Urdan , S. Graham, J.M. Royer, & M. Zeidner (Eds.), APA educational psychology handbook (Vol. 2, pp. 3-31). Washington,DC: American Psychological Association.Pekrun, R., & Perry, R. P. (2014). Control-value theory of achievement emotions. In R. Pekrun & L. LinnenbrinkGarcia (Eds.), International handbook of emotions in education (pp. 120-141). New York: Taylor &Francis.Sinatra, G. M., Broughton, S. H., & Lombardi, D. (2014). Emotions in science education. International handbookof emotions in education, 415-436.Tze, V. M. C., Klassen, R.M., & Daniels, L.M. (2014). Patterns of boredom and its relationship with perceivedautonomy support and engagement. Contemporary of Educational Psychology, 39, 175–187.Tze, V. M., Daniels, L. M., & Klassen, R. M. (2015). Evaluating the Relationship Between Boredom andAcademic Outcomes: A Meta-Analysis. Educational Psychology Review, 1-26.Ufer, S., Heinze, A., Reiss, K. (2009). Mental Models and the Development of Geometrical Proof Competency.In M. Tzekaki, M. Kaldrimidou, H. Sakonidis (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Conference of theInternational Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education, Vol. 5, 257-264, Thessaloniki: PME.Ufer, S., Heinze, A., Reiss, K. (2009a). What happens in students' minds when constructing geometry proofs - acognitive model based on mental models. In F.-L. Lin, F.-J. Hsieh, G. Hanna, M. de Villiers, Proof andProving in Mathematics Education, ICMI Study 19 Conference Proceedings, S. 239-244.ICLS 2016 Proceedings1021© ISLS