Investigating Collaborative Reflection with Peersin an Online Learning EnvironmentQiyun Wang, National Institute of Education, Singapore, qiyun.wang@nie.edu.sgChoon Lang Quek, National Institute of Education, Singapore, choonlang.quek@nie.edu.sgAbstract: In this study, a group of 22 vocational school teachers wrote weekly reflections inan online learning environment after attending a lesson. They also read the reflections writtenby others and gave comments. The purpose of this study was to find out how they reflectedcollaboratively in the online learning environment and what they learned from thecollaborative reflection process. Results show that they could reflect on the lesson content andlink it to their teaching practice. Also, their peers could get additional perspectives, negotiatemeaning, and learn how to reflect better from the reflection shared. Furthermore, they couldalso gain additional knowledge and emotional support from their peers’ comments. This paperdescribes the design of the study, and the themes that emerged from the reflection, comments,and responses. Benefits of writing collaborative reflection with peers in an online learningenvironment and issues involved in the study are discussed.Keywords: collaborative reflection; Edmodo; individual reflection; online reflection; teachereducation; technologyIntroductionBeing able to reflect on what they have learned from a training session and further apply it to teaching practiceis an essential competency for school teachers in the current information age, as it enables them to examine therelevance of the training content and improve their teaching practice to meet the constant change of students’learning needs (Killeavy & Moloney, 2010). Reflection can be written in different ways such as individually orcollaboratively. Individual reflection may enhance the development of insight, heighten cognitive awareness,promote critical thinking, and engender personal transformation. However, recent proponents of reflection havechallenged the assumption that reflection occurs solely in isolation (Morris & Stew, 2007), and suggest thatreflection should be a collaborative critical thinking process, in which participants can ‘attain intersubjectiveunderstanding and build knowledge together’ (Yukawa, 2006, p.207).Collaborative reflection can also be carried out in different settings such as online or face-to-face, andwith different people like the teacher or peers. Some existing research studies have examined how learnerscollaboratively reflect with the teacher in face-to-face settings (e.g. Morris & Stew, 2007) or in online settings(e.g. Yakawa, 2006). Other studied have investigated how learners reflect or discuss with their peers in onlinespaces (e.g. Killervy & Monoley, 2010; Yang, 2009). However, these studies usually focus on the affordancesof the online tools (such as a weblog or a discussion forum) for collaborative sharing and discussion. Very littleliterature reports on how learners reflect collaboratively with their peers and what they learn from each other inan online environment.The purpose of this study was to investigate how a group of vocational school teachers reflected in anonline learning environment after attending training lessons, and how their peers commented on the reflectionand what the peers learned from the reflection. Furthermore, this study also examined how they responded to thecomments received from the peers and what they gained from the comments. This paper describes the researchdesign of the study, and the themes emerged from the reflection, comments, and responses.Collaborative reflectionCompared to individual reflection, collaborative reflection is a step further. In addition to making the connectionbetween the new content with their existing knowledge, learners also share their individual understanding andget feedback from others, as shown in Figure 1. Much literature also argues that individual reflection mayobstruct professional development and it should involve external dialogue with others such as the teacher orpeers (Clarke, 2003; Hawkes & Romiszowski, 2001).Many existing research studies report on collaborative reflection between learners and the teacher(Wang & Woo, 2010; Yukawa, 2006). The advantage of collaboration with the teacher is that learners can getexpertise and support from the teacher, but learners may not disagree with the teacher’s opinions or examinehis/her comments critically, owing to the perceived expertise of the teacher or the imbalanced powerCSCL 2015 Proceedings244© ISLSrelationship (Bye, Smith, & Rallis, 2009; Leijen et al, 2009). Also, the quality of the teacher may heavily affectthe level of collaborative reflection (Morris & Stew, 2007).Triggering EventIndividual ReflectionPeers’ CommentCollaborativeReflectionFigure 1. Illustration of collaborative reflectionComparatively, collaborative reflection between learners and peers is more of a reciprocal process. Byreading through published reflection, peers would have the possibility to get valuable alternative perspectivesfrom their shared reflection (Leijen et al, 2009; van Gyn, 1996). Also, they may gain additional insights fromthe peers’ comments. Through the interaction and communication, learners and their peers can achieve mutualunderstanding and build knowledge together (Yukawa, 2006).No matter collaborative reflection occurs with the teacher or peers, an often reported benefit is therelease of learners’ stress and the expression of their emotions. Research shows learners often reflect on theaspects which they did wrong, but ignore positive aspects (Leijen, et al, 2009). Through collaborative sharingand reflection, they can find out that they are not alone in their feelings (Glazer, Abbott, & Harris, 2004). Theymay also get emotional support from the feedback received (Nicholson & Bond, 2003; Yakawa, 2006).Many existing studies examine collaborative reflection in face-to-face settings, such as those done byGlazer, Abbott and Harris (2004), and Morris and Stew (2007). Collaborative reflection in face-to-face settingshas many benefits such as enabling participants to clarify ideas or get feedback immediately. However,participants are often hard to find time to meet together (Glazer, Abbott, & Harris, 2004), and reflection minutesare not automatically recorded (Wang, 2010). On the other hand, the fast growth of technology has made writingreflection in an online learning environment not only feasible, but also more effective than in a face-to-facesetting (Wang & Woo, 2010).Learning is a highly social process according to the social constructivist learning theory. As learners’individual understanding on the same topic may be different, having an opportunity to share and negotiate theirunderstanding with peers would enable them to get various perspectives from others and hence understand thetopic better. In this study, collaborative reflection is defined as a reciprocal critical thinking process of learners,who share their understanding in an online learning environment after attending a lesson, give comments to thereflection written by peers, and respond to the comments received, so that they can reach mutual understandingand construct meaningful knowledge together.MethodsParticipants and course descriptionA total number of 22 (14 females, 8 males) vocational school teachers from China participated in this study,when they were studying as full-time Master students at National Institute of Education in Singapore for a year,majored in the subject of educational management. Their age ranged from 25 to 49. They had differentbackgrounds. Half of them were vice principals or deans, and the others were subject teachers. About one-thirdhad more than 15 years of teaching experience, and the rest had an average of 7 years. Their teaching subjectsincluded English language, computers, sports, nurse education and others. Their technology competency variedaccording to their subjects and ages.The course entitled Educational Technology and Issues in Management ran three hours a week andlasted for six weeks. The lessons involved both theories and hands-on activities. The theories includedaffordances of web 2.0 tools, design and evaluation of web-based courses, and technology supportedCSCL 2015 Proceedings245© ISLSprofessional development. The hands-on activities provided them with opportunities to explore simple ICT toolssuch as Blackboard and Lesson Builder.One of the course assignments was to write weekly collaborative reflection in the first five weeks. Eachreflection was supposed to include what they had learned in the lesson and how to apply it into practice. Theparticipants were required to share their individual reflection in Edmodo (http://www.Edmodo.com) with theirpeers. Also, they must view and give comments to at least two reflection posts written by others. Each reflectionwas 10 marks, of which their individual reflection and comments had five marks respectively.To ensure the collaborative reflection process to occur smoothly, some ground rules were established inthe first session. By each weekend, they had to complete their individual reflection and submit to Edmodo.Between the weekend and the next session, they had to give at least two comments to the reflection posts writtenby others.Research questions, data collection and analysisThe assumption of writing collaborative reflection in this course was to get the participants gaining knowledgenot only from the instructor, but also from their peers. The purpose of this study was to investigate how theycollaboratively reflected with each other and if they learned something useful from their peers and what theylearned. The main research questions were:• How did they reflect collaboratively?• What did they learn from the collective reflection process?Following the traditional grounded theory (Strauss & Corbin, 1990), this study adopted the constantcomparison approach. All reflection posts, comments and responses posted onto Edmodo were copied to a worddocument. The reflection of the first participant was read carefully in paragraphs, and the way of writingreflection was color coded for easy recognition later. After analyzing all reflection posts of the first participant,the researcher compiled the codes to further consolidate common themes.The coding process continued in a similar way with the rest of the participants. If a new themeemerged, it would be added to the theme list. After reading through all reflection posts, common themesemerged from the reflection were generated. The themes were further compared and combined. A list of two tofour themes was finally summarized. The same approach was applied to analyze the comments and responses.The following section reports on the common themes identified in the reflection, comments, and responses.FindingsReflectionAltogether 110 individual reflection posts were found in Edmodo and 184 codes were labeled. As shown inTable 1, three main themes emerged from the reflection, which were: i) elaborating on the content; ii) applyingthe content into practice; and iii) changing beliefs.Table 1: Themes emerged from the reflectionThemeElaborating oncontent-How/WhatReiterating/summarizing whatthey learnedadding new informationlinking to existing contentApplying thecontent intopractice-explaining existing phenomenasolving real problemsChanging beliefs-rethinking about their beliefstransforming their beliefs-TotalCSCL 2015 Proceedings246N49319%26.616.85.089582648.431.514.184921118445.65.01.06.0100© ISLSElaborating on the contentReflecting on the lesson content was a basic requirement for the individual reflection. The participantselaborated on the content in slightly different ways. The most often used way was that they simply repeatedwhat they had learned from the lesson, summarized some points from the instructor’s presentation, or addedcertain personal understanding but without in-depth explanations (N = 49, 26.6%).Another way was that they elaborated on the content further by adding new information (N = 31,16.8%). It was evident that they went to the Internet to search for additional information for better understandingthe contents that were new to them. In their reflection, they shared the additional information. For instance, aparticipant wrote in his reflection:Today what impressed me most was the constructivist learning theory. Previously I knew littleabout it. After the class, I went to the Internet to look for the definitions of constructivism.Some of the definitions are… (Lin Botao)An additional way of writing reflection was they elaborated on the content by connecting it to previouslessons, reflection, or content learned from other instructors (N=9, 5.0%). It seemed that they attempted tointegrate the newly learned content into their existing knowledge structure.Applying the content into practiceTwo ways of applying the newly learned content into practice was found. One way was that they attempted toexplain certain existing phenomena by using the content (N=58, 31.5%). For instance, one strategy to promoteconstructivist learning is to make the learning task meaningful to learners. A participant linked this strategy toher experience of learning an English word. She said:I still remember how I learned the word of ‘smother’ many years ago. The teacher told that inorder to remember its meaning, we could imagine that a mother was careless and her childwas finally ‘smothered’. I think this is the power of making leaning tasks meaningful (Zhangzhen)The other way was that they applied the lesson content into real world problem solving (N=26, 14.1%).After studying how to design web-based courses, a participant came up with an idea of designing a web-basedcourse, in which a learning activity was to establish a supermarket in Singapore. He wrote:Through the activity of establishing a supermarket in Singapore, students can learn practicalknowledge about laws, geographical information, economics, and goods information. Bydoing this activity, students can learn and construct knowledge by themselves. Designing thiscourse will be more useful than teaching them directly (Shao Feng)Changing beliefsAnother theme emerged from the reflection was the newly learned content stimulated them to rethink about theirunderlying beliefs and as a result their assumptions started to transform (N=11, 6.0%). For instance, before thelesson about using the weblog for teaching and learning, some of them thought that the weblog was a tool forwriting personal diaries or sharing information with friends only. They seldom thought that it could be used as ateaching or learning tool. After seeing some examples, they realized the potential of the weblog for learning andthereafter their opinions started to change.Another example was that a participant started to believe that using technology was not that difficultafter exploring some simple technological tools in this course. In her reflection, she wrote:I seldom thought of using technologies to enhance my teaching before because I felt it wasquite troublesome and there might be a lot of technical problems. In the past few sessions, weexplored a few simple but quite useful tools such as weblog and Edmodo. I feel usingtechnology is not that difficult and effectively using it would enable students to learner better.I will try to use technology more frequently in the future (Zhu yuhong)CSCL 2015 Proceedings247© ISLSCommentsAltogether 326 comments were posted to Edmodo and 336 codes were identified. As shown in Table 2, fourmajor themes became apparent in their comments, which were: i) commenting on the content; ii) expressingencouragement; iii) commenting on the way of writing reflection; and iv) bantering with peers.Table 2: Themes emerged from the commentsThemeCommenting on thecontent-How/Whatelaborating on the reflectionarticulating agreementnegotiating meaningarticulating disagreementlearning new content directly orindirectlyN13492241413%39.927.47.14.13.9Expressingencouragement-encouraging or being encouraged2772782.48.0Commenting on theway of writingreflection-respecting the positive attitudetowards reflection/learning175.0Bantering with peers-sharing jokesusing nicknames96153362.71.94.6100TotalCommenting on the contentPeers used to further elaborate on the reflection content in their comments (N=134, 39.9%). Slightly differentways of making comments were found. One way was that they picked up certain keywords or points from thereflection and elaborated further by adding new information or explanations. Another way was they attempted tooffer solutions to some problems mentioned in the reflection or to explain why the problems existed.Peers also expressed opinions in their comments. They might add personal experiences or additionalarguments to support the opinions embedded in the reflection (N=92, 27.4%), or disagreed with certain ideas inthe reflection by providing with different examples or perspectives (N=14, 4.1%). The following commentshows how a participant disagreed:I think you are too optimistic about constructivist learning with vocational school students. Ifeel it is a bit hard for the students to construct knowledge as their learning abilities are ratherlow. They even don’t know what to learn, needleless to say how to construct (Liu Ruiyan)In certain cases where the reflection content was unclear, peers tended to negotiate meaning by askingquestions, giving a different interpretation, or asking for more information (N=24, 7.1%). For example, aparticipant mentioned in her reflection that constructivist learning might not be feasible for low-ability students.She thought teachers had to consider students’ abilities when they were designing lessons and to providedifferent learning activities to different ability students. After this reflection, a peer in his comment wrote:I think what you mean is ‘yin-cai-shi-jiao’ (a Chinese idiom, which means teaching accordingto the student’s ability). My view is different and may be incorrect. It is exactly becausevarious students can construct, they have rich knowledge. We should allow different-abilitystudents to construct knowledge, and the initial knowledge constructed can be wrong. Theycan learn from errors. What do you think? Waiting for your critique (Wang Shu)In some comments, peers also stated what they learned from the reflection (N=13, 3.9%). Theyindicated that they either learned directly from the published reflection, or benefited from the reflection in anindirect way as certain ideas in the reflection triggered them to search for more information or study further.CSCL 2015 Proceedings248© ISLSExpressing encouragementIn addition to giving comments to the content, peers also expressed encouragement in their comments (N=27,8.0%). Generally, peers gave encouragement in two situations. One was that peers gave encouragement whenthey realized the reflection writer had certain problems or difficulties, and the other way was that they gavepositive comments or encouragement when the reflection writer presented good ideas, comprehensivesummaries, or constructive suggestions. The following two quotations show how a peer encouraged thereflection writer and how another peer was encouraged respectively:From your worries I deeply feel how much you love your profession, your students, and ourhome country. The conditions in our country are lower but improving very fast. We shouldbelieve our school facilities will become better in the future… (Xiong Ying)Commenting on the way of writing reflectionSometimes they did not comment on the reflection content, but on the way of writing reflection (N=17, 5.0%).What impressed them most was the responsible way of writing reflection, or the positive attitude towardsreflection writing or learning in general. The following quotation shows how a peer commented on the way ofwriting reflection:This is a very detailed and in-depth reflection. I did not link the content to practical problemsand my reflection stayed at a surface level. After reading your reflection, I understand what is‘xue-er-bu-si-ze-ming’(learning without thinking is useless) (Xiang Guohong)Bantering with peersOne way of bantering was they joked with each other (N=9, 2.7%). For instance, after reading a reflection postabout how easy to communicate with others at a distance by using instant messaging tools or email, a peer wrotein her comment that:Cheng cheng, if I want to talk to Qing-shi-huang (an ancient Chinese emperor lived more than2000 years ago), which tool should I use, instant messaging, mobile phone, or email? I amwaiting for your reply (Xiong Ying)Another way was that they occasionally addressed others by nicknames (N=6, 1.9%). A participantwho has a word of ‘Xiang’ (which is the elephant in Chinese) in his name, his peers often called him ‘a bigelephant’. It seems that he was acceptable with this form of address and no indication showed that he wasunhappy with it. Another participant was often labeled ‘xian zhi’ (which means a prophet) in her peers’ posts.ResponsesThis section describes how the participants responded to the comments received and what they gained from thecomments. Although the assignment did not require the participants to respond to the comments received, manyof them did spontaneously. Altogether 30 responses were found and each response was associated with a code.As shown in Table 3, two main themes arose from the responses, which were: i) responding to the commentcontent; and ii) responding to the emotional support received.Table 3: Themes emerged from responsesThemeResponding to thecomment contentHow/What-Responding toemotional support-Nproviding furtherexplanationsacknowledging thecontribution of comments:extending the breadth ordepth of reflectionfelt encouraged or not aloneTotalCSCL 2015 Proceedings249%1240.0826.7201066.733.330100© ISLSResponding to the comment contentMany responses were to answer the questions asked in the comments or to provide additional information tofurther explain their opinions (N=12, 40.0%). For instance in a reflection post, Mrs. Wu indicated that shecreated some animations when she was teaching a course and found the students learned better by using theanimations. However, she pointed out that creating animations was complicated and time consuming. In thefollowing comments, she was suggested asking students to create. If so, students would learn the topic betterand she could also collect good artifacts for future use. In the response, she argued that she did ask students tocreate but failed, and further explained why it did not work.Some responses were to acknowledge the contribution of comments (N=8, 26.7%). It seemed that thecomments made two major contributions: One was that the comments extended the breadth of their originalreflection. They thought the comments made the reflection content more complete, as they provided additionalperspectives or explanations. The other contribution was that the comments extended the depth of theirreflection, as these comments explained why certain phenomena happened or how to address theproblems/issues involved in the reflection. Such comments enabled them to understand the problems better orpromoted their understanding to a higher level.Responding to emotional supportThe participants sometimes got emotional support from the comments received and felt encouraged (N=10,33.3%). For instance in a reflection post, Ms. Tan became quite depressed after comparing the use of technologyin Singapore schools and in her own school in China. She described some of the problems she encountered inher prior teaching practice. In a comment, she was comforted that the school facilities had been better thanbefore, and the school condition in China would be catching up. After receiving the comment, she replied that:Thanks for your comfort and encouragement. I also hope the school condition would becomebetter, the gap will be narrowed down, and the use of technology in schools will be improvedfaster in the future (Tan Jingyun)DiscussionCollaborative reflection has additional benefits than individual reflection. In addition to learning content directlyfrom the lesson or the instructor, the participants in this study also shared their understanding with peers.Through the sharing, peers learned additional information, different perspectives, or the way of writing from thereflection. Also, the comments given by peers extended the breadth or depth of their original understanding.Obviously without sharing and interacting with others, these benefits would be hard to gain. This findingconfirms the outcomes of other studies done by Yukawa (2006), Morris and Stew (2007), and Yang (2009), whoclaim that collaborative reflection is a reciprocal critical thinking process, in which learners can gain knowledgefrom each other, and develop professional knowledge together.Collaborative reflection can also lead to higher level thinking and transformational changes. In additionto reflecting and commenting on the lesson content, the participants in this study also reflected on the way ofothers’ writing reflection, which is closely related to what Mezirow (1991) called process reflection. This studyalso showed that through collaborative reflection, participants demonstrated certain changes in their beliefs.Belief change is associated with premise reflection (Mezirow, 1991). In addition, the result further extends thefinding of Killeavy and Moloney (2010), who found that learners merely involved content reflection, notprocess or premise reflection in their weblog-based reflection.Collaborative reflection involves both cognitive and affective processes. In this study, the participantsdid not only reflect on content, but also gave encouragement or emotional support to others. The participantsappreciated the support and felt encouraged. This study supports the notion that collaborative reflection is anintegrated process, in which affective interactions help to build and maintain positive relationships amongparticipants and hence promote their cognitive development (Nicholson & Bond, 2003; Yukawa, 2006).Some benefits of collaborative reflection are associated with the online medium only. Online reflectionprovides a more equal opportunity for a group of participants to share and discuss ideas. Comparatively, theface-to-face discussion is often controlled by a few vocal participants and therefore the conclusion may bebiased (Wang & Woo, 2007). Online reflection can extend their sharing beyond the classroom. The discussionin the classroom may not reach a consensus due to the time limitation. The online reflection can become anothervenue for them to continue their sharing and discussion (Nicholson & Bond, 2003; Slavit, 2002).Online reflection makes the communication process more transparent. As all communication minutesare recorded down automatically, participants can easily refer back to the previous posts. This would enablethem to easily make connections between what they have just learned and what obtained before (Wang, 2010;CSCL 2015 Proceedings250© ISLSYukawa, 2006). Undoubtedly, without these affordances of an online tool such as Edmodo, the results of thisstudy might be compromised.This study has some implications for collaborative reflection to take place effectively. A few learnersare preferably more experienced in terms of teaching experiences or critical thinking skills, so that they can actas positive role models to others. In this study, some participants were more experienced or responsible. Theirreflection was in more depth. The others commonly indicated that they learned how to reflect from theselearners. This finding suggests that involving some higher ability or more experienced learners would show apositive sample to others and hence has the possibility to promote collaborative reflection to a higher level.Another implication is that learners are favored to have different backgrounds. In this study, theparticipants varied in their ages, positions, teaching subjects, or teaching experiences. Because of the difference,they could explain the same content or phenomenon from different perspectives, or give varied interpretations.This result implies that having different background learners would increase the likelihood of gaining morebenefits from peers in the collaborative reflection process.Writing collaborative reflection with peers in an online learning environment has a number of benefits.Learners can share their understanding with their peers in the online learning environment. Also, peers can learndifferent perspectives or positive attitude towards learning from the reflection they shared. Their peers also haveenough time to think about the reflection, and provide additional perspectives or encouragement, from whichthey can gain emotional support or extra information to further extend their original understanding. This studyconfirms that collaborative reflection with peers is a reciprocal learning process for learners to support and learnfrom each other and construct knowledge together.ReferencesBye, L., Smith, S., Rallis, H. (2009). Reflection using an online discussion forum: Impact on student learningand satisfaction. Social Work Education, 28(8), 841-855.Clarke, M. (2003). Reflections: Journals and reflective questions a strategy for professional learning,NZARE/AARE Conference. New Zealand.Glazer, C., Abbott, L., & Harris, J. (2004). A teacher-developed process for collaborative professionalreflection. Reflective Practice, 5(3), pp. 33-46.Hawkes, M., & Romiszowski, A. (2001). Examining the reflective outcomes of asynchronous computermediated communication on inservice teacher development. Journal of Technology and TeacherEducation, 9(2), 283-306.Killeavy, M., & Moloney, A. (2010). Reflection in a social space: Can blogging support reflective practice forbeginning teachers? Teaching and Teacher Education, 26(4), 1070-1076.Leijen, Ä., Lam, I., Wildschut., L., & Simons, R. (2009). Difficulties teachers report about studnets’ reflection:Lessons learned from dance education. Teaching in Higher Education, 14(3), 315-326.Mezirow, J. (1991). Transformative dimensions of adult learning. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Morris,L., & Stew, G. (2007). Collaborative reflection: How far do 2:1 models of learning in the practice settingpromote peer reflection? Reflective Practice, 8(3), 419-432.Nicholson, S., & Bond, N. (2003). Collaborative reflection and professional community building: An analysis ofpreservice teachers’ use of an electronic discussion board. Journal of Technology and TeacherEducation, 11(2), 259-279.Slavit, D. (2002). Expanding classroom discussion with an online medium. Journal of Technology and TeacherEducation, 10(3), 407-422.Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and techniques.Newbury Park, CA: Sage.Van Gyn, G. (1996). Reflective practice: the needs of professions and the promise of cooperative education.Journal of Cooperative Education, 31(2), 103-131.Wang, Q.Y. (2010). Using shared online workspaces to support group collaborative learning. Computers &Education, 55(3), 1270-1276.Wang, Q.Y., & Woo, H.L. (2010). Investigating students' critical thinking in weblogs: An exploratory study in aSingapore secondary school. Asia Pacific Education Review, 11(4), 541-551.Wang, Q.Y., & Woo, H.L (2007). Comparing asynchronous online discussions and face-to-face discussions in aclassroom setting. British Journal of Educational Technology, 38 (2), 272-286.Yang, S.H. (2009). Using blogs to enhance critical reflection and community of practice. EducationalTechnology & Society, 12(2), 11-21.Yukawa, J. (2006). Co-reflection in online learning: Collaborative critical thinking as narrative. InternationalJournal of Computer-Supported Collaborative learning, 1(2), 203-228.CSCL 2015 Proceedings251© ISLS