What Do Learning Scientists Do? A Survey of the ISLSMembershipSusan A. Yoon, University of Pennsylvania, yoonsa@upenn.eduCindy Hmelo-Silver, Indiana University, chmelosi@indiana.eduAbstract: This study responds to an often asked question, what do learning scientists do? Earlierattempts to answer this question came from a need to define a new field of educational research.However, as we have grown into a robust and highly productive society, self-referential methodsfor describing the membership is prudent to gain a more accurate understanding of where, forwhom, and what kinds of learning sciences research and practices take place. Here we report onthe responses of 253 ISLS members from a survey conducted in 2014. We discuss implicationsof the findings in terms of the types of impact learning scientists have, how we might use theseresults for advising prospective students, and ways that we might use this to create our future.Keywords: learning sciences, community, members, research fieldsIntroductionWhat do learning scientists do? Earlier attempts to describe the learning sciences (e.g., Kolodner, 2004; Nathan,Rummel, & Hay, forthcoming; Sawyer, 2014) have come from a need to distinguish the field from other areas ofeducational research. Such characterizations have served important roles for defining a more nascent field.However, as we have matured, it becomes important to define ourselves in terms of what we do rather than interms of differences with other fields. Evidence of this maturity is found in ISLS having two high impact flagshipjournals, two robust international conferences, a quarter century of scholarship since the launch of the Journal ofthe Learning Sciences (JLS), and learning scientists connected in large numbers across the globe. It now seemsprudent to let the learning science membership define what we do as an educational field. Such self-referentialactivities are common in social systems. Following Luhmann (1990) we apply the term autopoiesis as a rationalefor understanding our field in this way. Autopoietic systems are, “networks of productions of components thatrecursively, through their interactions, generate and realize the network that produces them and constitute, in thespace in which they exist, the boundaries of the network as components that participate in the realization of thenetwork” (p. 3). Taking stock of how organizations and fields evolve and self-organize provide lenses for whichto understand centers of gravity and boundaries, while at the same time providing insights into limitations andpossible directions for growth. We argue that now is that time to take stock. In this report, we present the resultsfrom a membership survey aimed at understanding the breadth of research, practices, methods, and occupations,articulated by members of the International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS) as of 2014. We believe thatthe results will have great utility in a number of institutional and professional activities including recruitment ofgraduate students, degree-bearing program development, and identification of potential areas of research interest,gaps, and growth.Earlier efforts to define the Learning SciencesKolodner (2004) notes that in establishing JLS, she wanted to create a venue for cognitive scientists of all kindsto publish research about learning in real world settings and about big ideas in learning. The inception of JLSsignaled the arrival of a new and growing field of educational research. Over the years, the learning sciences (LS)field has moved from being largely cognitive science focused to one that more fully integrates social and culturaltheories. The Learning Sciences, while still drawing on other methodologies, has also developed design-basedresearch as its signature research methodology (e.g., Bielaczyc, 2006; Brown, 1992). The field in general hasdefined itself with a focus on learning in complex domains with an interest in the dialectic between theory anddesign—using theory to guide design and enactments of those designs to guide theory (Bielaczyc, 2006).From the proceedings of a workshop aimed at defining the learning sciences and the implications of sucha definition for graduate education, Nathan, Rummel, & Hay (forthcoming) open with four themes they consideredto be central contributors to the development of the learning sciences field. These included (1) the design oflearning environments and practices, (2) use-inspired basic research, (3) using authentic practices and settings totest hypotheses, and (4) an engineering ethos that envisions new practices and resources to support learning.Delving into the specifics of the themes, among the interesting findings that emerged from workshop discussionswere challenges in what was termed “branding” the learning sciences along disciplinary and methodological linesthat has implications for the hiring and tenure processes. Another challenge that emerged was the difficulty inICLS 2016 Proceedings114© ISLSexplaining to prospective students what the career paths are for those with LS degrees. We take up some of thechallenges raised in that report in the present study.Recently, in the introduction to the 2nd edition of the Handbook of the Learning Sciences, Sawyer (2014)summarizes various research foci that have historically characterized learning sciences research such as theimportance of anchoring learning events in prior knowledge, the role of expert knowledge, learning through socialinteraction, the role of design and application in scaffolding levels of understanding, and technological supportsfor building knowledge. Teaching and learning in schools is also heavily emphasized. However, quite apart fromwhat is described as “The New Science of Learning,” a number of these strands have evolved beyond theirhistorical roots with nuanced approaches, designs, and environments that blur the boundaries of where, for whom,and what kinds of LS research and practices take place. Here, surveying the membership can provide a moreaccurate picture of what the field does and how we conceptualize our own LS identities. Next we describe themethods and findings of the ISLS membership survey.MethodsThe survey was commissioned by the president of ISLS in the year 2014 (second author) and charged to the chairof the ISLS Membership Committee (first author) to conduct. The process of constructing the survey wascollaborative and iterative. First, the president and chair met to discuss potential questions. Next, a small team ofMembership Committee affiliates worked to provide details and refine the survey. Categories of research andscholarship were taken from existing application protocols for ISLS membership as well as conference proposaltaxonomies for reviewing. A final draft was sent to the full Membership Committee and the ISLS Board ofDirectors to vet and revise. In January 2014, the draft survey in Survey Monkey was piloted with approximately20 learning scientists who worked in various known LS-oriented organizations, e.g., research scientists at SRI,university professors, graduate students, and post-doctoral fellows. Responses in the pilot phase were reviewedby the small team of Membership Committee affiliates (see acknowledgements), revised, and then sent out for afinal review with the full Membership Committee. The final survey was sent out through the ISLS listserv onFebruary 5, 2014 with multiple periodic email reminders over the course of 2 months. In total, 253 peopleresponded to the survey out of a possible 450 members, which constitutes 56% of the membership.Survey questionsThe survey was comprised of 32 multiple choice, fill in the blank, short answer, and drop down menu questions.Members responded to only the subsection of questions that pertained to the kind of job they did, e.g., professor,student, research scientist. Table 1 provides a modified version of the survey questions completed by professors.Table 1: ISLS Membership Survey 2014 questions for professors1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.Do you consider yourself a learning scientist?10. Do you advise students who are doing LS research?Do you see the work that you do as related to LS? 11. Of the masters students in the last 5 years, list their currentoccupations.Please select the category that best fits your career 12. Of the doctoral students in the last 5 years, list their currentstatus.occupations.What is your rank or job title?13. On average, how many students do you advise who aredoing LS research each year?What is the name of the department in which you 14. Please indicate your areas of [domain] interests (selectedwork?from 24 choices, e.g., Computer Science, LearningTechnologies, Psychology).What is the name of the department where you15. Please indicate the primary methodological approach (e.g.,obtained your doctoral degree?quantitative, qualitative, mixed methods)Did you receive your degree from an LS program? 16. Please indicate your research focus (selected from 39choices including “other”, e.g., Assessment, Gender,Scaffolding).What were your research interests while you17. Please indicate the contexts of your work (e.g., informalpursued your degree?learning settings).What are your current research interests?18. Please indicate the main population of your research.AnalysisFor multiple choice, fill in the blank, and drop down menu questions, frequencies of responses were tallied andreported. For short answer questions, responses were qualitatively mined to find general population categoriesICLS 2016 Proceedings115© ISLSand trends. Category descriptions were negotiated by the small team of Membership Committee affiliates.FindingsTable 2 summarizes key findings for the global population surveyed in terms of occupation, rank, degree andadvising. This is followed by more detailed findings for questions about masters and doctoral student occupations,domain interests, methodologies, research foci, contexts, and populations.Table 2: Combined population survey responses for occupation, rank, degree, and advisingQuestionCombined PopulationConsiders himself/herselflearning scientistCurrent job statusResponseYesNoWork in academia (e.g., professor, lecturer, post-doc)Professional staff working in academia (e.g.,researcher, evaluator, project manager)Professional staff working outside of academia (e.g.,SRI, Google, a museum)Doctoral studentMaster's studentAcademics (e.g., professor, lecturer, post-doc)Current Rank or titleFull ProfessorAssociate ProfessorAssistant ProfessorNon-Tenured Associate ProfessorLecturerPost-Doctoral ResearcherOther/UnspecifiedReceived degree from aYeslearning sciences programNoAdvise students doing learning Yessciences researchNoAverage number of studentsMastersadvised per yearDoctoralProfessional staff in or outside academia (e.g., researcher, museum)Frequencies2532302316019Percentage2710.74701604039333713255510510951Average: 3Average: 34690.99.163.27.518.602524.410.61.94.48.115.634.465.668.131.9As expected, a majority of respondents (63.2%) reported working in academia as professors, lecturers, post-docs,or doctoral students. However, we were surprised to see that nearly one-fifth of the members who respondedworked as professional staff in and out of the academy. Of those who said that they worked in academia, notsurprisingly, only 34.4% of the respondents said that they received their degree from a learning sciences program,however, a majority of them said that they advised students who are doing learning sciences research. This hasimplications for the specificity and need for learning sciences programs offered.To obtain an understanding of what learning sciences masters students do, the specific wording of thequestion was, “Of the MASTERS students whom you directly advised in the last five years, please list their currentoccupations to the best of your knowledge.” Similar wording was used for doctoral student occupations. Figures1 and 2 shows the distribution of responses. For masters students, occupations included data analyst, gamedesigner, financial analyst, banker, human resources development, and restaurateur. For doctoral students,interesting occupations included running a start-up company in digital media, leader of an educational NGO,instructional tech support in higher education, and assistant secretary of education. Of particular interest is thatthe largest number of former masters students are K-12 teachers.Figure 3 shows what the membership revealed about their domain interests as delineated in fourcategories of Academics, Doctoral Students, Professional Staff in Academia, and Professional Staff Outside ofAcademia. Not surprisingly, the categories of Learning Environments Design, and Learning Technologies werementioned the most followed by higher frequencies in the categories of Curriculum, Social Sciences, andProfessional Development. However, there were nearly 40 responses in the Other category, which includedDentistry, Philosophy, Architecture, Acupuncture, Measurement, and Civic Engagement. Similarly, Figure 4shows the details about the membership’s research foci. Again not surprisingly, we see high frequencies in thecategories of Collaborative knowledge building, Inquiry learning, Communities of practice, and ComputerICLS 2016 Proceedings116© ISLSsupported collaborative learning. The Other category included open education, social computing and epistemicfeedback.Figure 1. Masters Students’ Current Occupations.Figure 2. Doctoral Students’ Current Occupations.ICLS 2016 Proceedings117© ISLSFigure 3. Combined Domain Interests.ICLS 2016 Proceedings118© ISLSFigure 4. Research Foci.Figure 4. Research Foci.ICLS 2016 Proceedings119© ISLSWith respect to the question on the primary methodological approach, about 53.8% of respondents said that theyused mixed methods, and 23.3% said that they used qualitative methods. Just 3.6% said that they used quantitativemethods only and of those there were no doctoral students represented. Another 1% said that they used othermethods and about 10% did not respond.About half of the membership surveyed (49.4%) said that they work in formal learning settings. Workingonly in informal settings was indicated by 7.1% of the membership followed by 28.4% working in both formaland informal, and 4.3% working in other learning settings that included medical education and training, life longlearning, technical education, work sites, and everyday settings.Finally, Figure 5 shows the distribution of populations survey respondents said they worked with.Figure 5. Main Population of Research.We can see from the graph that a large portion of survey respondents work with students. However, we weresurprised that nearly half said that they worked with teachers. We were also surprised at the numbers of peopleworking with adult learners (23 percent) and with families (8 percent). Responses in the Other category includedphysicians, nurses, health professionals, disabled persons, and front-line youth workers. This suggests that otherthan early education, learning scientists work with learners across much of the life span.ICLS 2016 Proceedings120© ISLSConclusions and implicationsAcknowledging the autopoieitic nature of the LS, the survey aimed at investigating how the LS field has selforganized. Our first answer to the question “What do learning scientists do” is that we do quite a bit. But theresults of this survey provide suggestions that are more nuanced than that in terms of how LS has grown as a field,the types of impact learning scientists have, how we might use these results for advising prospective students, andways that we might use this to create our future. The first point of note is that while many of the faculty do nothave learning sciences degrees, the students they advise are in learning sciences programs—this is consistent withthe growth of learning sciences programs internationally (e.g., see NAPLeS at http://isls-naples.psy.lmu.de/).A second point of note is the diverse settings in which learning scientists work—that provides bothevidence of impact and information that we can use to advise prospective masters and doctoral students. Formasters graduates, K-12 schools are a frequent place of employment. This is particularly interesting because thisis one mechanism for learning sciences inspired theories and designs to have an impact on practice. It is also clearthat another place where learning scientists are influential and provide possible career paths are in informalsettings, disciplinary education (e.g., medical, dental education), and in the private sector such as game design.The third point answers directly the question posed in the title of the paper. Many learning scientists takea traditional route through academia, but at both the masters and doctoral levels, the survey results show that thereare other pathways as well – as consultants, in information technology fields, in non-profit and researchorganizations, for example. Most learning scientists, not surprisingly have interests in learning environmentsdesign and learning technologies but beyond that, they work in a range of disciplinary fields. Learning scientistsare also involved in professional development and curriculum, which goes along with developing learningenvironments and technologies, which after all, are embedded in curriculum and the need for professionaldevelopment support. One question that is not addressed here is the degree to which teachers are engaged inparticipatory design. The survey results also show that a substantial number of learning scientists are working inemerging areas such as embodied learning and makerspaces. In addition, it shows the range of research methodsused: most LS researchers are using mixed methods rather than purely quantitative or qualitative methods.Together these findings are particularly important as LS programs market to potential students, make decisionsabout faculty hires, or advise current graduate students.Finally, it is important to think about how the results of this survey can help the learning sciences createour future in line with autopoietic systems. In ISLS Board meetings, one question that has arisen is whether weneed special interest groups for various sub-communities. While this survey cannot answer this question, itsuggests some possible areas such as informal learning and other outside academia contexts. It might also suggestways that the society can help with brokering, or at least making visible, different forms of expertise so that newand productive collaborations might form. To support continual growth of the society, connections can also bemade between organizations that overlap with membership research and interests such as the Association forEducational Communications and Technology (AECT), Learning Analytics & Knowledge (LAK), the NationalAssociation for Research in Science Teaching (NARST), the European Association for Learning and Instruction(EARLI), and Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW). We hope that these results will help current andfuture learning scientists envision a range of possible futures.ReferencesBielaczyc, K. (2006). Designing social infrastructure: Critical issues in creating learning environments withtechnology. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15, 301–329.Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complexinterventions. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2, 141–178.Kolodner, J. (2004). The learning sciences: Past, present and future. Educational Technology, 44(3), 37–42.Luhmann, N. (1990). Essays on self-reference. New York: Columbia University Press.Nathan, M. J., Rummel, N., & Hay, K. E. (forthcoming). Growing the Learning Sciences: Brand or big tent?Implications for graduate education. In M. A. Evans, M. J. Packer, and R. K. Sawyer (Eds.) Reflectionson the Learning Sciences. (pp. xx-xx). New York: Cambridge University Press.Sawyer, K. (2014). Introduction: The new science of learning. In K. Sawyer (Ed.) Cambridge handbook of thelearning sciences. New York: Cambridge University Press.AcknowledgmentsThe authors would like to thank Murat Oztok, Emma Anderson, and Jessica Koehler-Yom for their work on thisstudy.ICLS 2016 Proceedings121© ISLS