Supporting Calculus Learning Through “Smooth” CovariationSusanne M. Strachota, University of Wisconsin - Madison, sstrachota@wisc.eduAbstract: Calculus is a passport for STEM-related careers. In response, this thought experimentanalyzes the current nature and state of pre-calculus, drawing attention to a common andproblematic approach to teaching function. I argue that this approach to function fosters a kindof thinking that conflicts with the kind of thinking required for a conceptual understanding ofcalculus and suggest one way to support teaching and learning of pre-calculus is to highlightthe features of function that are fundamental to calculus. I suggest that this can be done throughcarefully constructed mathematical tasks and present a framework for task development.Keywords: covariation, pre-calculus, calculus, smooth functionIntroductionAccording to the Bureau of Labor Statistics in May 2014, the ten highest annual mean salaries by occupation arein STEM-related fields. STEM-related fields are the most lucrative and fastest growing fields in the United Statesand many other countries. Candidates who are eligible for STEM-related careers usually have a strongmathematics background. Unfortunately, for many students, calculus serves as a “gatekeeper” on the educationpath that qualifies students for a STEM-related career. In turn, students are marginalized from the career andeconomic opportunities afforded by STEM-related careers.As the global economy continues to advance, education must evolve and advance with it. In the UnitedStates, there are not enough students taking pre-calculus courses in high school. In 2009, 35% of high schoolgraduates took pre-calculus (National Center for Education Statistics, 2015). Given the economic affordances ofcalculus, these numbers are alarming. I argue that the problem of calculus stems from the nature of teaching andlearning calculus.Similar conclusions have been drawn about algebra. In response, researchers have argued for earlyalgebra, which they distinguish from algebra early. Early algebra is a way of thinking that spans elementary andmiddle school mathematics. It involves building on traditional elementary curriculum by generalizing,representing, justifying, and reasoning with mathematical structure and relationships (e.g., Blanton, Levi, Crites,& Dougherty, 2011; Carpenter, Franke, & Levi, 2003; Kaput, 2008; Kaput, Carraher & Blanton, 2008). I arguethat the first step to addressing the problem of calculus is to re-conceptualize pre-calculus as a longitudinal strandof thinking that extends through middle and high school mathematics. That is, pre-calculus should involvebuilding on algebra by recognizing and articulating change and continuity in functional relationships. This is anew and evolving idea, but I suggest one way to support this approach to teaching and learning pre-calculus is tohighlight the features of function that are fundamental to calculus, and I argue that this entails characterizingfunctions as “smooth,” continuous, covarying quantities.Despite the many algebra and pre-calculus curricula that use function as a central concept, most highschool and freshman college students have a weak understanding of function, which is an important concept forstudying advanced mathematics (Carlson, 1998; Carlson, Jacobs, Coe, Larsen & Hsu, 2002; Monk & Nemirovsky,1994; Thompson, 1994a). I argue that the way that function is approached in teaching is conveyed throughcurriculum and instruction, including problems and activities. Moreover, the instructional approach fostersconceptualizing function a certain way.Often problems about or approaches to teaching functions promote thinking about variation at wholenumber intervals. For instance, a problem that reinforces this approach might ask students to graph a givenfunction. To solve this problem, students will likely plot and connect points. While students may correctly graphthe function, it is unlikely that they are making sense of how one quantity changes as the other quantity changesor attending to the change that occurs between the whole number intervals. In other words, students are unlikelyto interpret the function in terms of two continuous covarying quantities because a task similar to the one describeddraws attention to specific x- and y-values, in turn, portraying function as discrete and variables as static. Thisapproach is commonly used by students in U.S. schools (Leinhardt, Zaslavky, & Stein, 1990).Despite its prevalence, researchers believe this approach over emphasizes procedural and localized skills(Bell & Janvier, 1981; Leinhardt, Zaslavky, & Stein, 1990). Furthermore, I argue it overlooks the characteristicsof function that are essential to finding a derivative because it avoids the continuous features of function, andfurthermore highlights the discrete features of function. That is, this approach steers away from a view of functionthat supports learning in calculus, and fosters a kind of thinking that conflicts with the kind of thinking requiredICLS 2016 Proceedings982© ISLSfor a conceptual understanding of calculus. In response, this thought experiment explores a covariational approachto function that promotes learning in calculus and suggests characteristics of mathematical tasks that support theapproach. Specifically, I propose a framework for constructing mathematical tasks based on two arguments. First,“smooth” covariational reasoning fosters a productive disposition towards calculus. Second, the mental action ofcoordinating covarying, nonnumeric quantities promotes “smooth” covariational reasoning. In the followingsection, I justify these arguments. Then, I present the proposed framework. Finally, I share the theoretical andpractical implications of these ideas.Fostering a productive disposition towards calculusCovariational reasoning is the mental action of “coordinating two varying quantities while attending to the waysin which they change in relation to each other” (Carlson et al., 2002, p. 354). A covariational approach to functionis critical to students’ understanding of numerous secondary mathematics topics including quadratic relationships(Ellis, 2011), exponential relationships (Castillo-Garsow, 2012; Confrey & Smith, 1995), trigonometricrelationships (Moore, 2010; Moore & Carlson, 2012), rate of change (Carlson et al., 2002; Thompson, 1994a), theconceptual ideas of calculus (Thompson, 1994b), and differential equations (Rasmussen, 2001).By definition, reasoning covariationally necessitates reasoning about covarying quantities in terms ofrate of change. Hence, prior research has shown that reasoning covariationally results in thinking about change ina sophisticated way that is constructive to understanding calculus (Johnson, 2012). Moreover, the covariationalapproach to function draws attention to specific types of change (e.g. difference, accumulation and rotation), anddistinguishing types of change is critical for expressing and describing a relationship between two quantities inmultiple ways (Confrey & Smith, 1995). By focusing on change, a covariational approach steers away from thediscrete features of function, and furthermore highlights the continuous features of function, in turn, fostering thekind of thinking required for a conceptual understanding of calculus. Namely, the covariational approach exposesthe “conceptual underpinnings” of calculus (Johnson, 2012, p. 313).If students are to be calculus-ready, they need experience with covariational reasoning about function.In particular, types of covariational reasoning align more closely with the concepts of calculus. For instance,researchers have distinguished “chunky” forms of covariation from “smooth” forms of covariation (CastilloGarsow, 2012; Castillo-Garsow et al., 2013). “Chunky” reasoning involves thinking about change in completechunks (Castillo-Garsow et al., 2013). In contrast, “smooth” reasoning involves thinking about change as an ongoing process. A “chunky” approach is fundamentally discrete because it is built on integers, whereas, a “smooth”approach is fundamentally continuous, because it is built on the real numbers. Research in the area of “smooth”and “chunky” reasoning is emerging. However, researchers agree that “smooth” thinking is critical whenexploring the ideas of calculus (Castillo-Garsow, 2012; Castillo-Garsow et al., 2013; Johnson, 2012). Thus,“smooth” covariational reasoning fosters a productive disposition towards calculus.Promoting “smooth” reasoning through nonnumeric quantitative reasoningMentally operating on quantities to construct new quantities, while attending to the relationship between thequantities that were operated upon to construct the new quantity, is quantitative reasoning (Thompson, 1994b).Thus, covariational reasoning is reasoning quantitatively with covarying quantities. Furthermore, Thompson(1994b) argues that at its core quantitative reasoning, fundamental to covariational reasoning, is nonnumeric. Thatis, quantities are not necessarily numbers; numbers are specific quantities. The process of assigning numericalvalues to quantities is quantification, but quantification is not a requisite for conceiving a quantity (Thompson,1994b). Hence, no numeric measurement is necessary to reason with quantities, and quantitative reasoning can benonnumeric (Johnson, 2012; Thompson, 1994b). I argue that nonnumeric quantitative reasoning can support“smooth” covariational reasoning.One conceives distance as a varying quantity, when she reasons about a runner’s location as a measureof distance, d, from the start of the run. Furthermore, one is reasoning covariationally and quantitatively when sheconceives time, t, as a quantity that simultaneously varies with d (Thompson & Carlson, in press). That is, onereasons covariationally about the runner’s speed when she conceives rate of change as the ratio of two quantities,d and t. However, if one has a static conception of variable—variable is a symbol for unknown values—then,constructing that ratio does not result in “smooth” covariational reasoning (Thompson & Carlson, in press). Inother words, one can conceptualize speed as a ratio without conceiving d and t as continuously changing, butrather, by envisioning constant values for d and t and then comparing those values to conceive the ratio. By doingthis one does not attend to the change between the constant values, thereby the reasoning is covariational and“chunky.” This aligns with Confrey and Smith’s (1995) definition of covariation.An example of a “chunky” description of speed is “for every eight minutes, distance increases by onemile.” This ratio could result in “chunky” reasoning because the relationship is built on positive integers (Castillo-ICLS 2016 Proceedings983© ISLSGarsow, 2012). Without specifying integer value, quantities have no constant value, and then one must relatequantities, thereby attending to change in the quantities, to operate on them, or to reason quantitatively. Thus, Isuggest that representing quantities without numeric measurement promotes “smooth” covariational reasoning.For example, reasoning about a runner’s distance in relation to the start of her run is reasoning about a quantitywith a magnitude, but no numeric measurement. I suggest that nonnumeric quantitative reasoning promotes“smooth” covariational reasoning because it draws attention to the continuity of the variation.Framework for constructing tasksIn this section, I present a framework for constructing tasks that might support “smooth” covariation. The firstthree criteria address the context of the task. The last three criteria address the mathematics of the task and willbe elaborated on in what follows.First, the task should involve function. Second, the function should be presented as nonnumeric. Third,when possible, the function should model an experiential situation. For instance, riding in a car is experiential,whereas the growth of a bacteria colony is not experiential. Fourth, tasks should avoid the action view of function(Dubinsky & Harel, 1992). Fifth, tasks should allow for association (Thompson, 1996; Johnson, 2012). Lastly,tasks should involve monotonic functions (Ellis, personal communication, November 3, 2015).The action view of function involves representing a function as an algebraic expression, whereby studentscan plug values in for the independent and dependent variables (Dubinsky & Harel, 1992). Such an approach doesnot prevent students from “smooth” reasoning. However, it is conceptually limiting. Specifically, Dubinsky andHarel (1992) contrast the action view of function with the process view of function and argue that the processview “involves a dynamic transformation of quantities.” Essentially, the process view allows students to “thinkabout the transformation as a complete activity beginning with objects of some kind, doing something to theseobjects, and obtaining new objects as a result of what was done” (p. 85). Hence, the process view of functionaligns with quantitative reasoning. Therefore, I suggest that tasks avoid the action view in order to fosterquantitative reasoning about function.Association refers to the mental connections that students construct between objects and attributes ofobjects (Thompson, 1996). For instance, when considering an area problem, a student is using association byrelating side length, perimeter, and area to reason mathematically (Johnson, 2012). Association enables acting onobjects, and acting on objects facilitates internalization of the objects and the actions. In turn, association promotesconstructing a mathematical mental image. Thompson (1996) claims that images contribute “to the building ofunderstanding and comprehension” (p. 16) and support reasoning about quantitative relationships (p. 15).Therefore, tasks that offer space for association support mathematical image construction, thereby promotingunderstanding and quantitative reasoning.A monotonic function is a function that is either always non-increasing or always non-decreasing.Namely, the rate of change does not switch signs. Through personal communication with Amy Ellis (November3, 2015), I realized the relationship between a function’s monotonicity and “smooth” reasoning. Reasoning abouta monotonic function supports “smooth” reasoning because there are no points at which the direction of thevariation changes.Conclusions and implicationsAs the global economy continues to advance technologically, STEM-related careers become more competitiveand lucrative. If students are not prepared from an early age to take calculus they are marginalized from the careerand economic opportunities afforded by STEM-related careers. At a practical level, I address the lack of calculuspreparation in current mathematics curricula. Furthermore, I argue that the current approach is problematic, andpotentially detrimental to students’ success in calculus. On a theoretical level, I contribute a framework forconstructing tasks that promote students’ development of a productive disposition towards calculus. Futureresearch could build on this work by scrutinizing and refining the framework. Moreover, a design experiment thatiteratively tests the framework in the classroom could inform instruction and curriculum development. However,I recognize that tasks, which fit these criteria, do not guarantee “smooth” covariational reasoning. I alsoacknowledge that there are many ways to support calculus learning, and that fostering “smooth” covariationalreasoning is only one approach.This paper is a thought experiment, and I welcome criticism. I invite readers to share challengingperspectives and tasks that fit the framework criteria.ICLS 2016 Proceedings984© ISLSReferencesBlanton, M., Levi, L., Crites, T., Dougherty, B., & Zbiek, R. M. (2011). Developing Essential Understanding ofAlgebraic Thinking for Teaching Mathematics in Grades 3-5. Series in Essential Understandings.National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. 1906 Association Drive, Reston, VA 20191-1502.Carlson, M. P. (1998). A cross-sectional investigation of the development of the function concept. In A. H.Schoenfeld, J. Kaput, & E. Dubinsky (Eds.), Research in Collegiate Mathematics Education. III. CBMSIssues in Mathematics Education (pp. 114-162). Providence, RI: AMSCarlson, M., Jacobs, S., Coe, E., Larsen, S., & Hsu, E. (2002). Applying Covariational Reasoning While ModelingDynamic Events : A Framework and a Study. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 33(5),352–378.Carpenter, T. P., Franke, M. L., & Levi, L. (2003). Thinking mathematically: Integrating arithmetic and algebrain the elementary school. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.Castillo-Garsow, C. (2012). Continuous quantitative reasoning. Quantitative reasoning and mathematicalmodeling: A driver for STEM integrated education and teaching in context, 2, 55-73.Castillo-Garsow, C., Johnson, H. L., & Moore, K. C. (2013). Chunky and smooth images of change. For theLearning of Mathematics, 33(3), 31-37.Confrey, J., & Smith, E. (1995). Splitting, Covariation, and their Role in Development. Journal for Research inMathematics Education, 26(1), 66–86.Dubinsky, E., & Harel, G. (1992). The nature of the process conception of function. In G Harel & E. Dubinsky(Eds.), The concept of function: Aspects of epistemology and pedagogy. MAA Notes, 25, 85–106.Ellis, A. (2011). Algebra in the middle school: Developing Functional Relationship Through QuantitativeReasoning. In Early Algebraization (pp. 215–239).Ellis, A., personal communication, November 3, 2015.Kaput, J. (2008). What is algebra? What is algebraic reasoning? In J. Kaput, D. Carraher, & M. Blanton (Eds.),Algebra in the Early Grades. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum/Taylor & Francis Group & NationalCouncil of Teachers of Mathematics.Kaput, J., Carraher, D. & Blanton, M. (2008) (Eds.), Algebra in the Early Grades. Mahwah, NJ, Erlbaum.Lawrence Erlbaum/Taylor & Francis Group & National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.Leinhardt, G., Zaslavky, O., & Stein, M. K. (1990). Functions, graphs, and graphing: Tasks, learning, andteaching. Review of educational research, 60(1), 1-64.Monk, S., & Nemirovsky, R. (1994). The case of Dan: Student construction of a functional situation throughvisual attributes. In E. Dubinsky, A. H. Schoenfeld, & J. Kaput (Eds.), Research in CollegiateMathematics Education. I. CBMS Issues in Mathematics Education (pp. 139-168). Providence, RI:American Mathematical Society.Moore, K. C., & Carlson, M. P. (2012). Students’ images of problem contexts when solving applied problems.The Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 31(1), 48–59.Moore, K. C. (2010). Relationships Between Quantitative Reasoning and Students’ Problem Solving Behaviors.Proceedings of the Fourteenth Annual Conference on Research in Undergraduate MathematicsEducation (pp. 298–313). Portland, OR: Portland State University.Rasmussen, C. L. (2001). New directions in differential equations: A framework for interpreting students’understandings and difficulties. The Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 20(1), 55–87.Thompson, P. W. (1994a). Images of Rate and Operational Understanding of the Fundamental Theorem ofCalculus. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 26(2), 229–274.Thompson, P. W. (1994b). The Development of the Concept of Speed and its Relationship to Concepts of Rate.In G. Harel & J. Confrey (Eds.), The development of multiplicative reasoning in the learning ofmathematics (pp. 181-234). Albany, NY: SUNY Press.Thompson, P. W. (1996). Imagery and the development of mathematical reasoning. In L. P. Steffe, B.Greer, P. Nesher, P. Cobb, & G. Goldin (Ed.), Theories of learning mathematics (pp. 267-283). Hillsdale,NJ: Erlbaum.Thompson, P. W., & Carlson, M. P. (in press). Variation, covariation, and functions: Foundational ways ofthinking in mathematics. In J. Cai (Ed.), Third handbook of research in mathematics education. Reston,VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. (2015). The Condition of Education, 2015(NCES 2015-144), High School Coursetaking.AcknowledgmentsThis research was supported by the National Science Foundation under grant REC 0952415.ICLS 2016 Proceedings985© ISLS